IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 1
Decentralized Federated Learning: Fundamentals,
State of the Art, Frameworks, Trends, and
Challenges
Enrique Tomás Martínez Beltrán, Mario Quiles Pérez, Pedro Miguel Sánchez Sánchez, Sergio López Bernal,
Gérôme Bovet, Manuel Gil Pérez, Gregorio Martínez Pérez, and Alberto Huertas Celdrán, Member, IEEE
Abstract—In recent years, Federated Learning (FL) has gained
relevance in training collaborative models without sharing
sensitive data. Since its birth, Centralized FL (CFL) has been the
most common approach in the literature, where a central entity
creates a global model. However, a centralized approach leads
to increased latency due to bottlenecks, heightened vulnerability
to system failures, and trustworthiness concerns affecting the
entity responsible for the global model creation. Decentralized
Federated Learning (DFL) emerged to address these concerns
by promoting decentralized model aggregation and minimizing
reliance on centralized architectures. However, despite the work
done in DFL, the literature has not (i) studied the main aspects
differentiating DFL and CFL; (ii) analyzed DFL frameworks to
create and evaluate new solutions; and (iii) reviewed application
scenarios using DFL. Thus, this article identifies and analyzes the
main fundamentals of DFL in terms of federation architectures,
topologies, communication mechanisms, security approaches,
and key performance indicators. Additionally, the paper at
hand explores existing mechanisms to optimize critical DFL
fundamentals. Then, the most relevant features of the current
DFL frameworks are reviewed and compared. After that, it
analyzes the most used DFL application scenarios, identifying
solutions based on the fundamentals and frameworks previously
defined. Finally, the evolution of existing DFL solutions is studied
to provide a list of trends, lessons learned, and open challenges.
Index Terms —Decentralized Federated Learning,
Communication Mechanisms, Security and Privacy, Key
Performance Indicators, Frameworks, Application Scenarios.
I. I NTRODUCTION
A
RTIFICIAL Intelligence (AI) and, in particular, Machine
Learning (ML), will be one of the techniques that benefit
from the vast amount of data expected in the coming years.
However, data originating from a massive number of Internet
This work has been partially supported by (a) 21629/FPI/21, Fundación
Séneca, Región de Murcia (Spain), (b) TED2021-129300B-I00, by
MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033, NextGenerationEU/PRTR, UE, (c)
PID2021-122466OB-I00, by MCIN/AEI/10.13039/501100011033/FEDER,
UE, (d) the Swiss Federal Office for Defense Procurement (armasuisse) with
the DEFENDIS and CyberForce projects, and (e) the University of Zürich
UZH. (Corresponding author: Enrique Tomás Martínez Beltrán.)
Enrique Tomás Martínez Beltrán, Mario Quiles Pérez, Pedro Miguel
Sánchez Sánchez, Sergio López Bernal, Manuel Gil Pérez, and
Gregorio Martínez Pérez are with the Department of Information and
Communications Engineering, University of Murcia, 30100 Murcia, Spain
(e-mail:enriquetomas@um.es; mqp@um.es; pedromiguel.sanchez@um.es;
slopez@um.es; mgilperez@um.es; gregorio@um.es).
Alberto Huertas Celdrán is with the Communication Systems Group,
Department of Informatics (IFI), University of Zurich, 8050 Zürich,
Switzerland (e-mail: huertas@ifi.uzh.ch).
Gérôme Bovet is with the Cyber-Defence Campus, Armasuisse Science and
Technology, 3602 Thun, Switzerland (e-mail: gerome.bovet@armasuisse.ch).
of Things (IoT) devices are commonly stored in a distributed
manner for a wide range of scenarios such as smart grids [1],
remote health monitoring [2], or Internet of Vehicles (IoV) [3].
In such cases, data collection in central entities, as traditionally
done in ML, is often infeasible or impractical due to limited
communication resources, data privacy concerns, or country
regulations. In 2016, Federated Learning (FL) [4] solved
this issue by allowing entities (also known as participants,
clients, or nodes of a federation) to train collaborative models
without sharing training data. FL can be classified into two
categories according to how federated models are created:
centralized, known as Centralized Federated Learning (CFL),
and decentralized, known as Decentralized Federated Learning
(DFL). Nowadays, CFL is the predominant FL approach. It
considers a central orchestration server to create and distribute
a global model to the rest of the participants or clients. More
in detail, clients train their models with local data, then send
the local model parameters to a central server, where a global
model is created by aggregating and combining the parameters
of the individual model. Fig. 1 shows the timeline since
Google introduced FL and how new features and approaches
for decentralized scenarios have emerged. As can be seen, the
growth for CFL and DFL is remarkable.
221275
Google presents Federated Learning
2016
Cybersecurity measures for preserving-privacy
2017
Decentralized Federated Learning emerges
2018
Improved comms and aggregations in DFL
2019
DFL applied to IoT devices
2020
DFL studied in healthcare scenarios
2021
Blockchain/P2P techniques for ensuring decentralization
2022
3
CFL publicationsDFL publications
* only the first seven months of the year have been considered
2800
0
CFL DFL
1400
700
2100
100
0
50
25
75
0900210329
1250
25122793
415
5578
5G/6G for enhancing decentralized scenarios
2023*
Fig. 1: DFL Timeline (source: Web of Science).
DFL, also known as Serverless or Distributed FL, emerged
in 2018 to distribute the aggregation of model parameters
between the neighboring participants [5]. The operation of
DFL focuses on transmitting fast updates computed locally
by each node (e.g., model parameters or gradients) and
arXiv:2211.08413v5 [cs.LG] 13 Sep 2023
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 2
metadata (e.g., activations functions in neural networks) to
the rest of the federation nodes. Therefore, compared to
CFL, DFL improves the limitations of having a single point
of failure, trust dependencies, and bottlenecks at the server
node [6]. Firstly, DFL improves fault tolerance because nodes
constantly update their knowledge about available nodes or
those that have ceased communicating [7]. This enhances
the robustness of the network and mitigates the risk of a
single point of failure, as it happens in CFL. Secondly,
DFL improves trust issues by distributing trust between the
federation nodes, which determines the trust of the entire
federation, drastically reducing the single point of attack.
Thirdly, DFL reduces the network bottleneck issue by allowing
more evenly distributed communication and workload among
the nodes, thus reducing the chances of congestion or delays in
the overall network performance. Furthermore, DFL provides
self-scaling federations, as new nodes can join the network
and start communicating with other nodes, considering factors
such as device throughput or computational capacity. Although
the number of connections may decrease due to the limited
number of nodes each node can share data with, the network
remains tightly connected [4]. Finally, DFL enables more
efficient use of resources by distributing the computing
power required to aggregate the model parameters among all
participating nodes, rather than relying on a single parameter
server under centralized control [8].
Despite the benefits provided by DFL, it also introduces
new challenges in areas such as communication overhead,
training optimization, and trustworthy AI. Depending on how
the model aggregation is distributed across the network,
some DFL topologies may face increased communication
overhead [9]. In these cases, careful design and optimization
of the communication protocols, client selection strategies,
and trust mechanisms can help address these limitations.
Trust plays a critical role in these tasks, as it influences
the decision of which clients to share and aggregate model
parameters with. Additionally, the significant amount of model
parameters exchanged from the network edge to the data
centers carries the risk of saturating the backbone. As a result,
using DFL necessitates reevaluating the infrastructure from
a new perspective, as it reduces the need for centralized
infrastructure while aiming to improve network performance
and trustworthiness. In this context, trust becomes essential in
addressing the emerging challenges of DFL, such as client
selection and parameter sharing. These challenges warrant
further exploration and research, as the paper at hand does.
To explore the research field of DFL in an organized
fashion, the paper follows the methodological steps indicated
in Fig. 2. First, it is essential to identify and study the
key aspects that differentiate DFL from CFL (step 1 in
Fig. 2). For this purpose, the literature has highlighted some
elements such as (i) federation architecture, in charge of
modeling the decentralized scenario based on participants,
roles, decentralization of the nodes, and distribution of data
features; (ii) network topology, defining the associations
between the nodes of the federation [10]; (iii) communication
mechanisms, orchestrating the exchange of model parameters
within the federation [11]; and (iv) security and privacy,
studying possible cyberattacks and the countermeasures to
preserve data privacy and models robustness [12]. In addition
to the above fundamentals, identifying Key Performance
Indicators (KPIs) is important for assessing DFL performance
[13]. Three perspectives can be explored in this context:
nodes, communications, and models. The first focuses on
evaluating the heterogeneity and dynamism of nodes in DFL,
the second on the efficiency of inter-node communications for
data exchange, and the third on the performance of ML/DL
models for solving collaborative tasks. Finally, mechanisms
to optimize KPIs are also essential to ensure the efficiency
and multi-scenario adaptability of the approach [14]. In
this context, this article expands upon the existing literature
by comprehensively identifying and describing the DFL
fundamentals, KPIs, and optimization mechanisms.
FederationArchitecture
NetworkTopology
CommunicationMechanismsKPIs
DFLOptimizations
Healthcare
Network/Interconn.ProvidersTrendsCSP(e.g.Regional, specialized, Hyperscalers)LessonsLearned
Network/Interconn.ProvidersOpenChallenges
Industry 4.0MobileServicesMilitaryVehicles
Application Scenarios
Theoretical Overview
Practical Application
DFL Fundamentals
Security and Privacy
1
implemented by
DFL Frameworks2deployed in
3
4 44
Fig. 2: Methodological steps and storyline of this work.
The aforementioned fundamentals are crucial for developing
and comparing frameworks capable of training DFL-based
models (step 2 in Fig. 2). These fundamentals are particularly
important because they guide frameworks on managing model
parameter exchanges efficiently, establishing federations with
network participants, implementing effective aggregation
mechanisms for local models, and fostering more reliable
and trustworthy models. By considering these fundamentals,
DFL frameworks can ensure better performance, security,
scalability, and trustworthiness across a wide range of use
cases [15]. Therefore, the article at hand also aims to support
researchers working in decentralized systems using federated
approaches with a review of the most relevant features of
existing frameworks.
Then, application scenarios of DFL should be analyzed
according to the fundamentals and frameworks they implement
(step 3 in Fig. 2). At this point, it is important to
identify strengths and weaknesses, and enables more informed
decisions for selecting and deploying suitable approaches
in real-world scenarios. Nowadays, the most used scenarios
are: (i) healthcare, favoring the decentralization of clinical
records and collaborative diagnosis [16]; (ii) Industry 4.0,
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 3
improving the efficiency of automated industrial systems
[17]; (iii) mobile services, decreasing response times and
increasing the bandwidth of constraints devices [18]; (iv)
military, creating robust networks between Unmanned Aerial
Vehicles (UA Vs) and protecting them with cyber defense
mechanisms [19]; and (v) vehicles, ensuring high mobility and
local storage management [20]. Subsequently, each scenario
is explored by studying the proposed solutions according to
the previous fundamentals. Finally, all the aspects highlighted
above (fundamentals, frameworks, and application scenarios)
are analyzed with a view into the past, present, and future to
extract trends, lessons learned, and challenges in the field of
DFL. This is the last step of the followed methodology (step 4
in Fig. 2), which also shares the same structure and storyline
as the document at hand.
II. M OTIVATION AND CONTRIBUTIONS
DFL is an encouraging field of research that has repeatedly
been reported as challenging in several review articles in recent
years. While there are numerous surveys on FL, most focus
primarily on the CFL-based approach and provide limited
coverage of DFL. Therefore, to the best of our knowledge, this
is the first survey providing a comprehensive literature review
of DFL. The increase in the number of papers using DFL
in different scenarios: healthcare [2], [21], Industry 4.0 [17],
mobile services [18], military [19], and vehicles [22] motivate
the need to identify the fundamental elements of DFL and
review the work done to date.
Table I compares the most relevant surveys analyzing both
CFL and DFL approaches. Regarding CFL, several works
have attracted immense interest from academia and industry
[37]. In this sense, in 2020, Lim et al. [23] reviewed the
use of CFL in mobile networks using different end-user
applications, while in 2021, researchers such as Nguyen et
al. [24] and Khan et al. [25] examined the application of FL
in more complex scenarios involving different heterogeneous
IoT devices. Regarding security and privacy, Mothukuri et al.
[26] defined secure protocols between server and participants,
while Boobalan et al. [27] provided solid CFL fundamentals.
Other articles, such as [28], reviewed the applicability in
specific medical scenarios, discussing sensitive data privacy
mechanisms. Finally, Witt et al. [29] detailed the frameworks
most commonly used.
In contrast, most of the works covering DFL approaches
focus on analyzing the use of Distributed Ledger Technology
(DLT) technologies (e.g., Blockchain) [30]. Similarly, other
authors explored the applicability of DFL in particular
scenarios such as IoV [31], wireless communications [32], or
UA V devices [33]. Moreover, the article by Wu et al. [34]
provided a comprehensive survey of optimized DFL models
and algorithms focusing on network topologies. The authors
introduced various topologies with different participants and
potential optimizations for them. Additionally, Chen et al.
[35] analyzed the advances in FL, including aspects such
as communications, privacy, and security requirements in
DFL. Also, they provided solutions for collaborative training
using more generalized algorithms. Further research has also
been conducted on the frameworks that enable DFL. Witt
et al. [36] proposed a set of solutions that address privacy
and security issues in DFL. The authors also provided
reward systems based on smart contracts to incentivize honest
customer participation in the federated process. These latter
works address the performance of DFL in selected application
scenarios and detail critical elements of superiority over CFL
approaches.
Despite the contributions of previous works, as illustrated
in Table I, none addresses a literature review of DFL. In
addition, no previous research studies the fundamentals of
the emerging DFL approach. Similarly, recent work does not
review DFL solutions from a fundamentals perspective as
elements of analysis and comparison for different application
scenarios. These solutions are often deployed on frameworks
capable of managing the proposed federated approach [31],
[38]. However, no study highlights which frameworks are
feasible for this new decentralized approach nor collects the
latest developments. Within this context, and adhering to the
storyline outlined in Section I, it becomes essential to address
the following research questions:
• Q1. What are the fundamental aspects of DFL?
Depending on the federation architecture of the
nodes, network topology, communication mechanisms
between nodes, or security techniques, variations in the
DFL approach may occur. Similarly, approach-based
performance metrics and optimization techniques are
needed. However, solutions in the literature ignore details
about these elements and how they are combined.
• Q2. What DFL frameworks exist, and what fundamentals
do they provide? There is no study reviewing existing
frameworks able to build DFL solutions, analyzing their
characteristics, and defining which application scenarios
can be utilized.
• Q3. Which are the main characteristics of the most
relevant scenarios of DFL? It is necessary to analyze and
compare the previous DFL fundamentals and frameworks
to solve the problems motivated by each application
scenario. In addition, it is also necessary to detect the
characteristics and limitations posed by existing solutions.
The literature has not studied these approaches from a
broad perspective to have a complete view.
• Q4. What trends, lessons learned, and challenges have
emerged in DFL? To establish the guidelines for future
research, it is critical to describe how DFL has evolved
over the last years and what trends and open challenges
are in the field.
To answer the previous research questions and provide
readers with an up-to-date vision of DFL, the main
contributions of this manuscript are:
• An analysis of the fundamentals that compose DFL:
(i) federation architecture, (ii) network topology, (iii)
communication mechanisms, (iv) security and privacy,
(v) KPIs, and (vi) techniques to optimize the above
KPIs, paying attention to the studies and applications that
address each fundamental (answering Q1 in Section III).
• A description of the main open-source frameworks to
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 4
Table I: Comparison of surveys analyzing CFL and DFL.
Ref. Year FL
Approach
Device
Types / Area
Fundamentals Frameworks Application
Scenarios
Key Performance
Indicators
Focus and Solution Categorization
[23] 2020 CFL Mobile
networks
✓ ✓ ✗ ✓ •A survey on the integration of FL and edge computing.
•The applications of FL in IoT networks and services have not been
explored and discussed.
[24] 2021 CFL IoT
devices
✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ •A survey on FL in an IoT scenario, reviewing data distribution, ML
models, privacy mechanism, and communication architecture.
•The study has not discussed other approaches or frameworks capable
of managing the scenario.
[25] 2021 CFL IoT
devices
✓ ✗ ✓ ✓ •A systematic review of FL in IoT scenarios, detailing the application
areas and limitations.
•The study only considers CFL architectures without discussing the
disadvantages compared to other approaches.
[26] 2021 CFL Security
Privacy
✗ ✓ ✓ ✗ •A survey of FL security and privacy, defining secure protocols.
•The analysis of secure measures using different FL approaches is
missing.
[27] 2022 CFL FL
baselines
✓ ✓ ? ? •A survey on the FL baselines with a basic introduction to definitions
and architectures.
•The application scenarios of FL have not been discussed.
[28] 2022 CFL Healthcare ? ✗ ✓ ✗ •An overview of the use of FL in Healthcare scenarios.
•Limited overview of techniques for deploying realistic scenarios.
[29] 2022 CFL Framework
review
✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ •An overview of frameworks for deploying DFL-based architectures.
•Lack of identification of application scenarios.
[30] 2022 DFL DLT ✗ ✗ ✗ ? •A description of the challenges and applications of Blockchain.
•The paper only focuses on the Blockchain technology to ensure node
decentralization.
[31] 2022 DFL IoV ✗ ✓ ✓ ? •A brief description of FL in fog radio access networks.
•The applications of FL in IoT networks have not been presented.
[32] 2022 DFL Wireless
communications
✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ • A review of the techniques for adapting FL to distributed
environments.
•The paper only reviews techniques without giving specific application
scenarios or frameworks.
[33] 2022 DFL UA V
devices
✗ ✗ ✓ ✓ •A brief survey on the application of FL in UA V networks.
•Other domains, such as smart city or IoT devices, are not considered.
[34] 2023 DFL DFL
baselines
? ✗ ? ✓ • A study of optimized DFL models and algorithms focusing on
network topologies.
• Limited review regarding federation architectures, device
heterogeneity, and frameworks.
[35] 2023 DFL DFL
baselines
? ✗ ✓ ✓ •A comparison of CFL and DFL federation architectures regarding
topologies, privacy, and security.
•The study does not have enough information about DFL, including
algorithms, optimizations, or metrics for evaluating its performance.
[36] 2023 DFL Framework
review
? ✓ ✗ ✗ •A systematic review of DFL frameworks, highlighting differences,
limitations, and future research directions.
• The study focuses only on Blockchain-related frameworks and
participant reward techniques.
This work 2023 DFL Healthcare
Industry 4.0
Mobile services
Military
Vehicles
✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ •A survey on the baselines and fundamentals of DFL, generating a
novel taxonomy in the literature.
•The paper explores the application of DFL solutions and frameworks
in various areas of interest.
✓fully addressed,? partially addressed,✗ not addressed by the work
Decentralized Federated LearningResearch Questions
Q1. What are the fundamental aspectsof DFL?Section III
Federation ArchitectureSection III.ANetwork TopologySection III.B
Q4. What trends, lessons learned, and challenges have emerged in DFL?Section VI
Security and PrivacySection III.DCommunication MechanismsSection III.C OpenChallengesSection VI.C
LessonsLearnedSection VI.BCurrent TrendsSection VI.A
DFLOptimizationsSection III.FKey PerformanceIndicatorsSection III.E
Q2. What DFL frameworks exist, and what fundamentals do they provide?Section IV
Mature FrameworksSection IV.AIncipientSolutionsSection IV.B
Q3. Which are the main characteristicsof the most relevant scenarios of DFL?Section V
HealthcareSection V.AIndustry 4.0Section V.B
MilitarySection V.DMobile ServicesSection V.C
VehiclesSection V.E
Fig. 3: Research questions and sections answering them.
create and manage DFL solutions. This description
is divided into mature literature solutions that have
been redesigned to offer decentralized architectures
and incipient solutions that address specific scenarios
(answering Q2 in Section IV).
• A comprehensive review and comparison of the
characteristics, advantages, and limitations of the most
relevant solutions in the literature on the most used
application scenarios: (i) healthcare, (ii) Industry 4.0, (iii)
mobile services, (iv) military, and (v) vehicles (answering
Q3 in Section V).
• A set of current trends, lessons learned, and future
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 5
challenges drawn from DFL works and frameworks
reviewed (answering Q4 in Section VI).
Fig. 3 shows where and how the above questions are
addressed in the paper at hand, acting as a table of
contents. In particular, Section III analyzes the fundamentals
of DFL in terms of architectures, topologies, communications,
security, performance indicators, and techniques for optimizing
scenarios. Section IV examines the main open-source
frameworks that support the deployment of DFL with
the previously defined fundamentals. After that, Section V
describes and compares the leading solutions found in the state
of the art, analyzing deployment considerations, the robustness
of the proposed solution, and the results obtained. Section VI
draws a set of lessons learned, current trends, and future
challenges in the research area. Finally, Section VII provides
an insight into the conclusions extracted from the work.
III. F UNDAMENTALS AND TAXONOMY
The fundamentals of DFL establish the groundwork for
analyzing existing frameworks and solutions in the literature.
Following the storyline presented in Fig. 2, this section
responds to “ Q1. What are the fundamental aspects of
DFL?,” identifying and analyzing the following fundamentals:
(i) federation architectures, (ii) network topology, (iii)
communication mechanisms, (iv) security and privacy, (v)
KPIs, and (vi) techniques to optimize the previous metrics.
These fundamentals are detailed in Fig. 4, showing the
subcategories that compose them and the resulting taxonomy.
Additionally, Table II details the above taxonomy with
a detailed definition of the various fundamentals and the
literature solutions that address them.
A. Federation Architecture
DFL solutions require an architecture that allows
effective collaboration and communication between
network participants. In this sense, this work analyzes
the fundamentals based on the federation type in the
communication, differentiating organizations or data centers
from other devices. Subsequently, DFL architectures can
also be categorized based on the roles of the participants.
In this classification, each participant is assigned a specific
task within the federated learning process. Furthermore, the
decentralization schema differentiates between a decentralized,
semi-decentralized, and centralized architecture. The semi-
decentralized approach can be seen as a hybrid between
centralized and decentralized architectures, offering a balance
of both. Finally, the definition of DFL architectures is based
on the data distribution during federation. In the following
sections, each category will be discussed in greater detail.
1) Federation Type: The literature categorizes DFL
architectures according to the type of federation, which is
based on the participating nodes: cross-silo and cross-device.
The differences lie in the number of participants and the
amount of data stored in each one [39].
In cross-silo DFL, the nodes are organizations or data
centers [40]. There is usually a relatively small number of
nodes ( 100), where each node has a relatively small
amount of data (about thousands of samples) and limited
computational power [41]. Due to concerns regarding power
consumption, individual devices cannot be asked to perform
complex training tasks. Furthermore, nodes could periodically
disconnect from the network so that the network dropout
rate would increase considerably, negatively impacting DFL
performance. The nodes are usually on-edge devices or robots
like UA Vs [42], where communications between devices are
often weak if not kept in a close coverage radius.
2) Participant Role: Network nodes may have one or
more roles that define their behavior and operation in DFL
architectures. In particular, the existing roles are trainer,
aggregator, proxy, and idle. A trainer node aims to train a local
model with its local dataset and transmit the parameters to its
neighboring nodes [43]. The trainer node expects to receive
the parameters of the updated federated model to incorporate
it back into the local model. In contrast, the node with the
aggregator role is responsible for obtaining the parameters
FU N DAME N TAL S OF
DE C E N T R ALIZED
FEDE R ATEDLEA RN I N G
S E C U R ITYA N D
P R IVA C Y
KEYPE R FO R MA NC E
I N DI C ATO RS
DFLOPTIMIZATIO NS
FEDE R ATIO N
A RCH ITE C TU R E
N ETWO R K
TOPOLOGY
C OMMU N I C ATIO N
ME CH A N I S M S
M al w are Att ac k s
Adv ersar i al Att ac k s
Secur ity Coun t er m easures
Co mm un i ca ti ons  Sc h e m a
P eer- t o- P eer  Co mm un i ca ti ons
G oss ip Co mm un i ca ti ons
Optimiz a ti on  o fF e d era ti on  No d es
Optimiz a ti on  o fF e d era ti on  Co mm un i ca ti ons
Optimiz a ti on  o fF e d era ti on M o d els
F ull y Connec t e d Ne tw or k s
P ar ti all y Connec t e d Ne tw or k s
No d e  Clus t er i ng
F e d era ti on Typ e
P ar ti c ip an t Role
D ecen t ral iz a ti on  Sc h e m e
D a t a Di s t r ib u ti on
F e d era ti on  No d e KPI s
F e d era ti on  Co mm un i ca ti ons KPI s
F e d era ti on M o d el KPI s
Fig. 4: Taxonomy with the fundamental aspects of DFL.
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 6
Table II: Comparison of solutions addressing different DFL fundamentals.
Taxonomy Fundamentals Definition and Solutions Analyzed in the Literature References
Federation
Architecture
Federation Type •Federation from data silos or data centers [39], [39], [40]
•Federation from different types of devices, such as mobile phones or IoT devices [2], [41], [42]
Participant Role •Identify the functionality of participants during federation [43], [44]
Decentralization Schema •Techniques for enabling DFL while maintaining model convergence and data privacy [6], [45], [46]
•Balance the power and leadership in SDFL while maintaining the benefits of DFL [14], [47]
•Combine centralized and decentralized elements to optimize FL performance and scalability [48]
Data Distribution •Solutions for HFL, VFL, and TFL partitioning the dataset [42], [49]
•Explore ways to sample data to ensure better distribution across nodes [50]
Network
Topology
Fully Connected Networks •Define the federated networks with participants connected to each other [9], [51]
•Measure of robustness, flexibility, fault tolerance, cost, or security [10], [52]
Partially Connected Networks •Define the classification in star, ring, or random structured networks [53], [54]
•Measure of robustness, flexibility, fault tolerance, cost or security [55], [56]
Node Clustering •Define and classify the federated networks based on participants clusters [44], [57]
•Measure of robustness, flexibility, fault tolerance, cost or security [58]
Communication
Mechanisms
Communications Scheme •Data exchange where all participants transmit their models at the same time [11], [59]
•Update participants models independently at different times [60], [61]
Peer-to-Peer Communications •Methods for designing P2P topologies in DFL [62]–[64]
•Develop techniques for disseminating data and models in P2P networks [65]–[68]
Gossip Communications •Methods to design gossip protocols in DFL [69], [70]
•Strategies to select nodes and optimize the efficiency in gossip-based communication [71]–[74]
Security and
Privacy
Malware Attacks •Determine the impacts of malware threats in decentralized scenarios [75]–[77]
•Identify the risks associated with fully connected, star-structured, and random networks [12], [49], [56]
Adversarial Attacks •Identify adversarial attacks affecting decentralized architectures during collaborative federation [49], [78], [79]
•Compare the adversarial attacks between different FL approaches and their adaptive capacity [80], [81]
Security Countermeasures •Secure techniques to protect the transmission of model parameters between participants [4], [82]–[84]
•Encryption mechanisms while preserving reliability between participants [45], [83], [85]
Key Performance
Indicators
Federation Nodes KPIs •Measure the node performance considering the heterogeneity and dynamism of the network [13], [86]
•Quantify the resource capabilities and node mobility of participating nodes in DFL scenarios [7], [87]
Federation Communications KPIs •Measure the reliability of model parameter exchanges between participants in DFL [10], [88]
•Evaluate communications flexibility and overhead in DFL [7], [89]
Federation Models KPIs •Measure the performance by solving different tasks or using multiple datasets for benchmarking [13], [90], [91]
•Mechanisms to ensure the trustworthiness of federated models [92]–[96]
DFL
Optimizations
Optimization of Federation Nodes •Optimal methods for selecting nodes to transmit model parameters [97], [98]
•Optimize algorithms to suit the heterogeneous node resources and capabilities [26], [58], [99]
Optimization of Federation Communications•Efficient distribution schemes that minimize the number of network exchanges [71], [100]–[102]
•Compression techniques to reduce the amount of data that needs to be exchanged [103]–[107]
Optimization of Federation Models •Explore efficient ML models to increase model performance and reliability during federation [88], [108]–[111]
•Use of meta-learning, multitasking, and federated distillation in federation tasks [91], [112]–[115]
from the neighboring nodes, aggregating them in the global
model, and transmitting them to the neighboring nodes. In
specific network topologies (see Section III-B), aggregators
are not directly reachable by other nodes, and proxy nodes
are needed. This role is intended to relay the received model
parameters to neighboring nodes, allowing different nodes
or network topologies to be interconnected [44]. However, a
participant may not have any of the above roles, being idle in
the network and not participating in the federation.
3) Decentralization Schema: The federation architecture
can be affected by the decentralization level maintained
between participants, with three different approaches emerging
(see Fig. 5): DFL, Semi-Decentralized Federated Learning
(SDFL), and CFL. In DFL, participants perform four steps
independently: local model training, parameter exchange, local
model aggregation, and parameter exchange again. In SDFL,
participants perform the first two steps, while an aggregator
participant handles the third step and transfers leadership for
the aggregation functionality (step 5). In CFL, a central server
handles parameter aggregation (step 3), with the rest of the
network receiving and updating their local models accordingly
(steps 4 and 5).
In DFL architectures, the network is fully autonomous,
managing communications with other nodes and aggregating
the model parameters independently of the other nodes.
Each network node can select one or more nodes to
transmit data, defining bidirectional communications between
them. Furthermore, decentralization can be assumed to be
fixed or dynamic, as the interconnections between nodes
can change over time. Unlike the node-server architecture,
the absence of a centralized server in DFL allows for
the relaxation of the synchronous model update. Different
solutions in the literature make several assumptions about
network connectivity, particularly considering that each node
is connected to all other nodes in the network or only to a set of
neighboring nodes. Therefore, issues such as fixed or dynamic
topology arise and the use of directed or undirected graphs
[46]. A fixed topology provides stability and predictability but
limits adaptability, while a dynamic topology allows flexibility
but requires additional overhead to maintain connectivity. In
contrast, directed graphs model asymmetric relationships, and
undirected graphs are more flexible for modeling symmetric
relationships between participants.
In contrast to the previous approach, SDFL architectures
maintain an aggregator role that rotates among the participants
belonging to the network. The aggregator transmits the
leadership (aggregation functionality) periodically during the
federation, selecting the neighboring node randomly or
based on its performance, such as network, computational,
or power capacity [47], [48]. The leadership in SDFL
architectures plays an essential role in determining which node
is responsible for collecting the model updates and computing
the next-generation model by aggregation. Also, the choice of
leadership selection mechanism can significantly impact the
performance, efficiency, and robustness of the system.
Finally, in CFL-based architectures, data decentralization
is orchestrated by a single aggregator. This central node
aggregates the model parameters shared periodically by
each trainer and creates a robust central model distributed
among the nodes [6]. In this approach, the aggregating
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 7
PARTICIPANT 1
CENTRALIZEDFEDERATED LEARNING
MODELUPDATEGLOBALUPDATECENTRAL SERVER
24
DECENTRALIZEDFEDERATED LEARNING
PARTICIPANT N
13
PARAMETERSEXCHANGE24
SEMI-DECENTRALIZEDFEDERATED LEARNINGLEADERSHIPTRANSFERPARAMETERSEXCHANGE
TRAINERPARTICIPANT
LEGENDAGGREGATORPARTICIPANT
 LOCAL MODELAGGREGATION ALGORITHMLOCAL DATASET
24
5
PARTICIPANT 2
PARTICIPANT 3
PARTICIPANT 4
PARTICIPANT 113
PARTICIPANT N
PARTICIPANT 2
PARTICIPANT 3
PARTICIPANT 4
PARTICIPANT 115
PARTICIPANT 2
PARTICIPANT 3
PARTICIPANT N
NEXTAGGREGATORPARTICIPANTCENTRALSERVER
6
 3
Fig. 5: Common approaches based on DFL architecture decentralization. The numbers inside the circles represent the training
lifecycle.
participant is fixed during federation, with the central node
being responsible for aggregating model parameters for each
trainer in the network. Additionally, the CFL architecture
makes it possible to ignore problems related to topology and
device performance by not having decentralized aggregators.
To improve this situation, techniques such as Multiparty
Computation (MPC) can guarantee the immutability of model
updates and coordination between participants directly, as
could be the case for healthcare institutions [45].
4) Data Distribution: The DFL approach, like CFL, has
different configurations depending on the properties of the
distributed data. Data can be Independent and Identically
Distributed (IID) when the federation participants behave
similarly. Therefore, the data distribution does not fluctuate
(xi ∼ D), and the events associated with the data points are
independent, i.e., they are not connected to each other in any
way ( ∄j p (xi, xj) = p(xi) p(xj)), where p represents the
joint probability distribution of the data points. However, in
some application scenarios, nodes are usually heterogeneous.
Hence, the data often have a non-IID format, where data
vary in quality, diversity, and quantity in the network,
thus increasing the complexity of modeling, analysis, and
evaluation. The problem of heterogeneous data distribution
poses a challenge for DFL. It can cause local model
parameters to converge at different stationary points for
different participants, making global convergence difficult.
In addition, there might be multiple aggregated models
during the federation where nodes are connected irregularly,
leading to different global models receiving data with varying
distributions. Addressing this challenge involves determining
how to handle these various models. One option presented
in the literature is to continue aggregating them at a higher
level [117], while another option is to accept the presence
of different federated models based on the network topology
and characteristics of the nodes [118]. By considering these
alternatives, DFL can better address the issues arising from
non-IID data distributions.
Finally, depending on the nature of the problem to be solved
and the organization of data (features and samples) among
nodes, DFL is usually divided into three types: Horizontal
Federated Learning (HFL) [42], Vertical Federated Learning
(VFL) [49], and Transfer Federated Learning (TFL) [50]. HFL
is the most commonly employed method in DFL, as it involves
sample federation and is applicable when there are many
overlapping features and few overlapping nodes, typically
associated with cross-device scenarios. In contrast, VFL and
TFL require more in-depth analysis and comparison, as they
are more complex to adapt and deploy in application scenarios
that take advantage of their unique data organization. VFL
focuses on feature binding when there are many overlapping
nodes and few overlapping features, while TFL is considered
when there is a limited feature and sample intersection
between nodes. The goal of TFL is to build efficient models
for specific applications in cases where data are sparse, which
makes it another relevant aspect of DFL strategies.
The successful transition from CFL to DFL involves
the adaptation of commonly used CFL datasets. Techniques
like decentralized sparse partitioning prove instrumental in
aligning these datasets with the unique characteristics of DFL
[38]. These techniques consider the aggregation algorithms,
participants’ roles, and the task to be solved. Similarly,
the distinct data distribution across nodes in DFL could be
addressed using federated sampling techniques, which help
maintain data diversity while ensuring statistical accuracy
[119]. These adaptations make it feasible to use CFL datasets
in DFL scenarios efficiently, leading to optimized learning
processes and improved performance of DFL implementations.
B. Network Topology
In DFL, the network topology describes the organization
of participants and determines their communications.
Therefore, the importance lies in the impact on convergence,
generalization, overhead, and robustness of the DFL
approach. There are three network topologies used in DFL:
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 8
1
6
4
3
2
5
16
4
3
2
5
1
6
4
3
2
5
13 7
524
1
64
32
5 9
1110128
6
(a) FULLY CONNECTED NETWORKS (c) NODE CLUSTERING
P1
P2
STAR-STRUCTURED(b) PARTIALLY CONNECTED NETWORKSRING-STRUCTUREDRANDOM
SECURITYCOMMUNICATIONSCOST
ROBUSTNESS
FLEXIBILITYFAULTTOLERANCE IMPORTANCEHIGHMEDIUMLOW
CHARACTERISTICS
Fig. 6: DFL network topologies. (a) Fully connected networks, (b) Partially connected networks (star-structured network, ring-
structured network, random network), (c) Node clustering. Pn indicates the node acting as a proxy.
fully connected networks, partially connected, and node
clustering. Fig. 6 shows these network topologies and their
characteristics. In particular, the topologies are evaluated
depending on the importance (high, medium, low) of
robustness, flexibility, fault tolerance, communications cost,
and security.
1) Fully Connected Networks: This network topology
maintains direct links between all pairs of nodes. When a new
node is added to the system, a link must be added to each node
(see Fig. 6a) [10]. Thus, the communication cost is high and
grows with the number of nodes in the network. Moreover,
adding new nodes increases the complexity of managing
connections for each node, resulting in low flexibility. Despite
the high communication cost and low flexibility, this topology
is highly reliable and robust, as the network can still function
when a few nodes or links fail [51].
2) Partially Connected Networks: In some network
topologies, participating nodes may only have direct links
to some nodes in the network, regardless of the shape of
the topology. Therefore, the basic transmission cost for each
node is lower than in fully connected networks since the
model parameters are not transmitted to all nodes. As a result,
communication cost may be higher than in fully connected
topologies since the model parameters transmitted may go
through several intermediate trainer participants until they
reach the aggregating participant, resulting in a longer delay
[55]. This work divides partially connected networks into star-
structured, ring-structured, and random.
In a star-structured network, one of the nodes acts as a
proxy participant and enables the federation communication
with all other nodes (see the first subfigure of Fig. 6b). When
a new participant is added, only one link is needed to connect
them to the central node. Consequently, the communication
cost grows linearly as the number of nodes increases, and
the resources of the node limit network scalability. However,
since all communications between non-central nodes must pass
through the central node, it becomes a potential bottleneck,
reducing flexibility. Additionally, the network has low fault
tolerance, as the failure of the central node disrupts the
communication between all nodes. Some DFL solutions use
temporary connections in star topologies, but establishing and
terminating these connections adds significant overhead.
In a ring-structured network, nodes are connected circularly
(see the second subfigure of Fig. 6b). The communication
cost grows linearly as the number of nodes increases, as
each node only maintains two fixed links, regardless of
network size. This contributes to medium flexibility. However,
as the number of nodes grows, transmission delays for
model parameters also increase. Ring networks can be
unidirectional, where nodes transmit model parameters to only
one neighbor, or bidirectional, where nodes send parameters to
both neighbors, providing higher reliability and fault tolerance
than unidirectional rings.
Sometimes a defined topology is not supported by
the federation, and nodes generate connections following
heuristics based on the proximity or computational capacity
of nearby neighbors. Due to intermittent connections in DFL,
the network maintains a dynamic node structure, creating
random network topologies over time [53]. In this sense,
some topologies use expander graphs and deterministic local
optimization algorithms to reduce communication overhead
in these networks. The third subfigure of Fig. 6b represents
a network topology with six random nodes. Specifically, it
describes a network based on the Erdös–Rényi model, where
links between nodes are established randomly [54]. This type
of network offers high flexibility and moderate fault tolerance
but can result in higher communication costs and variable
security levels.
3) Node Clustering: Recent publications have identified
another DFL network topology for creating hierarchical
clusters with models adapted to the distribution of nodes. In
this regard, the literature addresses two approaches: similarity-
based clusters [120] and proxy-based clusters [44]. In the
former, clusters are determined by the similarity of the local
model parameters of the nodes. As a result, each cluster is
more individualized for the nodes that compose it, obtaining a
homogeneous performance between nearby nodes. In contrast,
proxy-based clusters aim to use nodes that interconnect
different topologies, forwarding model parameters. In this
regard, proxy nodes have to be evaluated in terms of
performance since they transmit data from one cluster to
another, generating an important bottleneck in the overall
architecture [58]. The disadvantage of this clustering method
implies that all nodes are initially linked to a coordinating
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 9
node, which is not feasible in all application scenarios.
Furthermore, since nodes within a cluster share similar data
distributions, individually trained cluster models may be less
generic and robust than models exposed to global data
distributions [57]. Fig. 6c shows the usage of proxy nodes
to interconnect topologies in node clustering.
C. Communication Mechanisms
This fundamental defines the procedures that enable
DFL communications between network nodes. First, the
communications scheme in DFL, based on synchronous,
asynchronous, and semi-synchronous communications,
is detailed. Then, this subsection presents two different
decentralized communications mechanisms: peer-to-peer
(P2P) [62] and gossip [121].
1) Communications Scheme: The communications schemes
determine the behavior of the nodes when transmitting
or receiving model parameters from neighbors and then
aggregating them. Depending on the type of scenario and
the objective pursued, DFL can be supported by synchronous,
asynchronous, or semi-synchronous communications. The first
alternative requires each node to perform local training,
consisting of multiple steps, usually expressed in epochs. An
epoch is defined as a complete iteration through the entire
local dataset. After completing local training, all nodes acting
as trainers send the parameters of their local models to all
their neighboring nodes and receive the new model they have
to integrate. This training technique, known as synchronization
points, is repeated for several federation rounds. In this sense,
the nodes will have to wait for the end of the round to
transmit their model parameters again. Therefore, a drawback
of this scheme is its slow convergence due to waiting for slow
or idle participants. To address this problem, over-selection
techniques could increase participant selection but also lead
to resource waste and selection bias [11].
In asynchronous communications, no synchronization point
exists, and nodes can transmit and receive model parameters
independently of the other federation participants. Because
there is no idle time for participating nodes, asynchronous
protocols have a faster convergence speed [61]. However, they
cause higher communication costs and lower generalization
due to staleness [60]. It is also necessary to detect stragglers
(i.e., slow devices) in the federation, delaying data propagation
through the network topology. In the same way, aggregators
need aggregation policies adapted to the number of model
parameters received, as they vary during federation rounds.
Nevertheless, asynchronous communications are well suited
for cross-device DFL scenarios, in which nodes have varying
computational capability and intermittent availability [59].
Finally, semi-synchronous communications provide a
balance between resource usage and communication costs.
In this schema, each node trains locally until a predefined
synchronization point is reached. Consequently, nodes with
varying processing capacities and data volumes perform
different numbers of epochs. The batch serves as the basic
computation unit, allowing for finer control over when a node
contributes to the federation. Some studies, such as [60],
introduce thresholds for each device that compare the changes
in local model parameters with available local resources to
determine the benefits of aggregation at each round.
2) Peer-to-Peer Communications: Traditionally, the
deployment of overlay networks has been used mainly
for P2P message exchange, online social networks, and
routing infrastructures. DFL leverages P2P message exchange
networks for local model parameter exchanges at each node.
However, unlike traditional P2P networks, DFL deals with
a dynamic and heterogeneous topology, where participants
often change their location or role in the federation [62].
In this regard, selecting d random neighbors to exchange
information is not always feasible. The main drawback of
DFL is that nodes cannot randomly choose d neighbors
among existing nodes since there is no central coordinator to
determine these associations [67]. However, each node can
determine neighbors if global information is given when the
topology is created, and neighbor discovery mechanisms are
implemented during federation [64]. Other alternatives are
to employ distributed Delaunay triangulation networks for
wireless sensor networks or regular random topologies for
data center and memory interconnection networks [122].
3) Gossip Communications: Gossip communications
enable asynchronous transmissions of model parameters
between network nodes. This type of communication
relies on the P2P sampling service with the objective
that nodes in the federation communicate and exchange
data [71]. The comparison of the DFL approach using
gossip communications versus the CFL approach has been
extensively studied, with superior performance obtained in
the former when a better understanding of model parameters
is employed [69]. However, this mechanism maintains a
restrictive functionality where communication occurs between
close neighboring nodes. To address this limitation, additional
processes are presented to determine the location of a node
using random walks [123] and node selection techniques,
relying on the heuristics of the distance between nodes or
underlying device features [72]. For instance, local models
can be updated with partially received parameters and be
optimized by mixing weights according to the matrix of
communication link reliability [89]. Finally, some application
scenarios of gossip communications in DFL are providing
accurate recommendations (e.g., location logs, movie ratings)
[72] or in Distributed Online Social Networks (DOSN) where
users can directly communicate only with their immediate
neighbors in a social graph [73].
D. Security and Privacy
Decentralized scenarios may be more susceptible to attacks
than CFL scenarios as the number of participants grows
within the federation. Nevertheless, the level of vulnerability
largely depends on the network topology. For example, in a
fully connected network, where each participant has numerous
connections, the impact of an attacker might be less severe
than in a centralized CFL scenario since the attacker can only
compromise a limited portion of the network. Nonetheless,
decentralized scenarios still face increased risk due to the
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 10
numerous intermittent and often weak connections between
the participants.
In this sense, DFL can be subject to various attacks,
including malware deployment and adversarial attacks, which
can affect federation models and decentralized data, similar
to the CFL approach [76]. While the former exploits intrinsic
DFL fundamentals in the architecture or communications to
affect the federation adversely, the latter aims to infer federated
models and local node data, manipulate preconditions or
destroy the model. Notable among these attacks are model
inversion or membership inference, which can potentially
infer the raw data by accessing the model [49]. Despite
these potential attacks, countermeasures have been adopted to
address them, preserve data and model privacy, and develop
recovery plans to minimize harm and disruption. In particular,
this paper presents two main approaches adopted in current
DFL scenarios for data protection: cryptographic methods and
differential privacy.
1) Malware Attacks: Malware, also known as “malicious
software”, is a critical issue in the DFL approach due to
the fundamentals based on decentralized architectures without
a server coordinating the scenario. Malicious entities with
high propagation through the network can affect behavior
and interfere with its proper functioning. This issue differs
in impact compared to more traditional approaches such as
CFL, mainly because DFL does not have a centralized entity
to coordinate the cooperation of participants in the federation.
Thus, malware can be created and deployed directly among
new network participants. Due to the number of connections
to neighboring nodes, fully connected networks, star-structured
networks, and random networks are the most affected in terms
of security. While the first ones maintain communication links
between each pair of nodes, the others establish links with
either a central node or random nodes that could be malicious
or dishonest.
Regarding communications between nodes, malware also
has a significant impact due to the high number of exchanges
in DFL. The exchanged messages are obtained by neighboring
participants, extracted, and processed for aggregation or
forwarding in the case of proxy participants. However, the
information obtained may have been modified during the
exchange, adding malicious data using rootkits or including
the participant in a botnet [75], [76]. In this way, the node
would be infected and could spread easily and quickly among
the federation participants, especially when there are many
links between neighbors.
2) Adversarial Attacks: DFL must address adversarial
attacks caused by malicious nodes participating in the
federation. These attacks, inherited from traditional CFL
operations, include poisoning attacks on HFL and VFL
approaches [49]. Furthermore, DFL is prone to poisoning
attacks for the following reasons: (i) DFL scenarios involve
numerous participants, increasing the likelihood of faulty
behavior from one or more nodes; (ii) local training data and
training processes of participants are hidden from other nodes
in the network, making it impossible to verify the authenticity
of updates sent by participants; and (iii) multiple participants
may generate vastly different local updates. Consequently,
secure aggregation protocols might be negatively affected
by aggregation performed by malicious nodes, rendering it
infeasible to audit local updates [56]. In this sense, the paper
at hand analyzes such attacks on DFL solutions to assess their
impact on the network.
Adversarial attacks can be classified based on the timing of
the attack (training or evaluation time) and frequency (one-shot
or multiple) [124]. Among training-time attacks, Byzantine
attacks are prevalent. In these attacks, malicious nodes disrupt
model training by transmitting poisoned, corrupted, or fake
model updates to other nodes in the network. Since malicious
nodes in DFL keep their data and aggregations private,
they can poison their model and distribute their parameters
without consequences. These attacks can be executed in a one-
shot manner each round or multiple times in asynchronous
communication scenarios. Similarly, Sybil attacks create
multiple fake pseudonym nodes that flood DFL networks. It
is difficult to mitigate these threats since no central authority
can verify node identities and distinguish between pseudonym
and non-pseudonym nodes. Using pseudonyms, an attacker
can launch DDoS attacks and disrupt the DFL network. The
attacker can command multiple pseudonyms to flood a targeted
node with pairing requests, rendering it unable to respond to
and communicate with legitimate nodes [80]. Additionally, an
adversary can corrupt the reputation system of decentralized
applications. Nodes could obtain a false high reputation, being
forced to participate in the network and being queried by other
nodes, thus degrading their performance.
Other attacks attempt to infer DFL communications with a
high attack frequency. One of these threats is Eclipse attacks,
which enable attackers to gain partial or full control of a
participant by manipulating its connections with neighboring
nodes [78]. In such attacks, the attacker nodes control many
connections, which allows them to “eclipse” the victim,
rendering messages that should reach it useless. The attackers
could gain complete control of all traffic to the victim if all
node connections belong to them [79]. Free Rider attacks
are also a type of attack that takes advantage of DFL
without contributing useful data to it during the training
process [125]. Finally, in evasion attacks, malicious nodes
mimic participation in DFL by generating misleading updates,
crafting inputs that manipulate the model into producing faulty
collaborative models.
3) Security Countermeasures: The use of countermeasures
is essential in the DFL approach to prevent malicious
participation and preserve data privacy. DFL establishes a
federation by sharing model parameters, such as gradients,
weights, or meta-level information among participants.
However, exchanging gradients or meta-level information
during distributed training can reveal information about the
training data and model updates, making exchanging model
weights preferable for privacy preservation [81].
Additional countermeasures comprise several techniques
inherited from CFL architectures, as reported in [12]. Most
of them are employed during decentralized federation to
obfuscate updates at the cost of reducing the accuracy of
each local model, relying on traditional Differential Privacy
(DP) relaxations to inject less noise. However, this technique
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 11
may degrade the performance of constrained participants,
leading to suboptimal results in the federation. In DFL, each
participant needs to perform a significant computation to add
or suppress noise per set of model parameters transmitted on
each communication link, making it more challenging to adapt
than CFL [82]. Other techniques, such as data augmentation
and obfuscation, can prevent sample reconstruction in
local training. However, model parameters shared among
neighbors would be equally exposed to malicious nodes. A
promising solution is to combine DP mechanisms with secure
aggregation and additive Homomorphic Encryption (HE),
depending on the application scenario and required security
level, and deploy them on a larger number of federation
participants. In other cases, it is preferable to rely on anomaly
detection mechanisms [126] or model misbehavior detection
[90] to detect malicious actors that may deteriorate DFL
performance. While the former focuses on the data supplied to
the model, the latter analyzes the internal performance of the
model depending on the task. In these cases, detection could
involve the deployment of mitigation to reduce the severity
of a cyberattack. Recent research has further augmented
defensive capabilities by integrating Moving Target Defense
(MTD) techniques. Specifically, random neighbor selection
and dynamic IP/port switching offer enhanced resilience
against communication-based threats [83]. Moreover, anomaly
detection has significantly improved by incorporating time
series analysis techniques [84].
Finally, cryptographic methods, such as Secure Multiparty
Computation (SMC), are widely used in DFL to preserve
the privacy of exchanges between neighboring nodes [45].
Federation participants must encrypt their messages before
sending them, operate on them, and decrypt the encrypted
output to obtain the final result. Despite the security provided
by SMC, nodes can experience a significant computational
overhead, similar to previous DP techniques. To address this
issue, new approaches have emerged to provide adequate
security performance while maintaining efficient resource
usage. One such approach is based on deploying a Trusted
Execution Environment (TEE) [77], such as Intel SGX
processors, which can protect the code and data loaded inside
it. Each node in the network can use this environment to
increase its trustworthiness while allowing model parameters
to be securely added during federation. In addition to
cryptographic mechanisms and secure environments, DFL also
requires mechanisms that guarantee the decentralization of the
architecture while ensuring inter-participant reliability. DLT
technologies, such as Blockchain, provide an ideal solution for
this requirement by ensuring the immutability of exchanged
models [68]. It is accomplished through a P2P consensus
scheme governing the network, where the model parameters
of each participant can only be updated through consensus. In
this sense, a novel solution uses a lightweight Blockchain with
a unique consensus protocol and storage strategy, significantly
reducing overhead while guaranteeing privacy. This approach
optimizes performance by mitigating slower device impacts
and maximizing storage utilization [127]. At the same time, a
transparent and immutable reward system ensures the trust of
the participants by detecting malicious activities.
E. Key Performance Indicators
KPIs are necessary to measure the efficiency and suitability
of the activities and components of DFL architectures. It
is essential to know these metrics to detect and resolve
federation, communications, or security issues more quickly,
reducing the frequency and duration of incidents while
increasing efficiency [86]. In this sense, KPIs are utilized for
the proper evaluation of the main components of the DFL
approach: (i) the federation nodes, detailing the evaluation
in terms of mobility and resource capabilities; (ii) federation
communications, defining the flexibility and overhead of
the deployed architecture; and (iii) the federation models,
reviewing their performance and trustworthiness in solving
distributed ML tasks (see Fig. 7).
1) Federation Nodes KPIs: DFL must have KPIs to
evaluate the participating nodes of the federation. Thus, the
heterogeneity and dynamism of the nodes in DFL scenarios
are relevant factors adding complexity to the network. In
this sense, resource capabilities and node mobility are
identified as promising KPIs to determine node performance.
The resource capabilities KPI comprises computational and
network capacity.
• Computing capacity . It provides internal participant
resource indicators for local training computation and
model parameter aggregation during federation. Some
metrics related to this category are CPU/GPU, disk, or
RAM usage. One of the aspects of computational capacity
is the autonomy of the node to address the tasks. In this
sense, time, cycles, and temperature are considered [87].
• Network capacity . It determines the node ability to
manage communications with one or more neighbors.
In this regard, the following metrics are important to
analyze: the number of bytes transmitted and received, the
number of packets transmitted/received, the bandwidth, or
the number of listening/established sockets [7].
In addition to resource capabilities , DFL presents the
node mobility KPI to evaluate the dynamism of the network.
Therefore, nodes can be easily affected in communications
with other nodes, generating intermittent inputs and outputs
in the network. The node mobility KPI is determined by node
traceability in both the network and local.
• Network traceability . It monitors the state of each node
and traces its mobility in the network. For this purpose,
this metric computes the edges of nearby participating
nodes to determine their link with other participants in the
federation, which denote the number of near neighbors. In
this way, the network can extract information about the
position, direction, and absolute velocity of each node
[13].
• Local traceability. It allows determining the DFL network
to contribute by monitoring local interfaces and their
characteristics. Thus, it is possible to determine the
mobility intent. Metrics such as the number of open ports
or network usage during federation are identified [128].
Network traceability metrics usually complement them in
the evaluation of node performance.
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 12
DFL KPIs
FLEXIBILITYMOBILITY
RESOURCE CAPABILITIESOVERHEAD
TRUSTWORTHINESSPERFORMANCE
•Edges of nearby participating nodes
•Open ports•Network usage during federation•The average path length of the federated network
•Distance between participants•Weights links
•Bytes/packets exchanged•Bandwidth•Listening/established sockets 
•Loss•Accuracy•Sensitivity•NN layers•Activation functions•Algorithm aggregation
•Specificity•Convergence time 
•CPU/GPU usage•Disk usage•RAM usage•Time spent•Cycles•Temperature 
•Uptime•Latency•Jitter•Bandwidth
•Throughput•Packet loss•Packet repetition 
•Clustering-based trust•Distance-based trust
•Accountability•Explainability•Fairness•Architecture design
•Privacy•Robustness•Reliability
Fig. 7: Key Performance Indicators for DFL.
2) Federation Communications KPIs: Model parameter
exchanges between nodes in a DFL approach might experience
instability due to asynchronous communications, leading to
nodes processing and exchanging data at varying rates.
Consequently, this could result in delays and inconsistencies
in the learning process, as some nodes may handle
outdated information. Furthermore, the aggregation process is
complicated by heterogeneous aggregator devices with diverse
computational capabilities and communication protocols.
Such heterogeneity can cause inconsistencies across different
network segments, ultimately having a negative impact on the
accuracy of the models for a group of participants. Moreover,
asymmetric topologies may cause uneven data distributions
or processing capabilities among nodes, posing challenges
in attaining a uniformly distributed learning process. In this
sense, communications flexibility and network overhead are
essential for optimal balance. Regarding the communications
flexibility, the DFL approach is evaluated according to the
following elements.
• Federation size . It provides an evaluation of the
predisposition of the architecture to exchange model
parameters between nodes. This metric accurately
calculates the average path length of the network,
representing a stable number strongly affected by the
movement of the nodes and, thus, the flexibility of
the network. Reduced network size improves parameter
transmission performance by reducing interference [10].
• Robustness of communication links . It determines the
strength of the links with the other neighbors participating
in the federation. Some metrics that allow its evaluation
are the distance between nodes, reactance, and reliability.
Link weights are often used to support evaluations, with
high weights being maintained for links with a high
percentage of correctly received transmissions [89].
In the context of DFL, several scenarios require
decentralized technologies, which can face significant
performance issues. One of the main challenges arises from the
communication-intensive nature of DFL applications, which
require frequent model parameter transmissions involving
large amounts of data. As the federation progresses or the
model becomes more complex, this communication becomes
even more intensive, leading to high network overhead, where
a high overhead can lead to applications failing to meet
response time, quality, or resource utilization requirements.
Network overhead is evaluated from the following metrics [7].
• Uptime, often known as availability, reflects the time of
use of the federated network since it became available to
participants.
• Latency measures the time a data packet travels between
network nodes.
• Jitter indicates the variability of a latency time and
measures the consistency of a network transfer rate.
Very low jitter is preferred when a real-time reaction is
required (e.g., warning of enemy UA Vs).
• Bandwidth and throughput . While the first indicates the
quantity of data a network path is anticipated to support
or successfully convey from one point to another at a
specific time, the second describes the amount of data
transported between nodes inside a network path.
• Packet loss can denote congestion, low bandwidth, and
interference. It refers to packets transferred from one
device to another but fail to arrive at their destination.
Packet loss is the ratio of packets received at the
destination to packets sent from the source.
• Packet repetition. When a data packet is successfully sent
but does not reach its destination, it must be retransmitted.
Retransmissions occur in all networks; however, they are
more common in wireless networks due to low signal
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 13
strength, concealed nodes, and interference.
Both communications flexibility and network overhead are
mainly limited to the model parameters exchanges during
federation for each K step. Assuming M is the parameter
size of the model, there would be N −1 times communications
in a round, being the average overhead M · (N − 1). Thus,
K could reduce the communication frequency, decreasing
the performance of DFL. A summary of the communication
complexity comparison with CFL architectures is shown in
Table III, where [ ] denotes the standard rounding function.
The table shows that the total volume of data transferred
per DFL round is comparable across all three architectures.
However, the communication overhead per node is different
among decentralized architectures. Specifically, SDFL has the
potential to achieve better performance in node communication
overhead, which could benefit system bandwidth utilization
and increase robustness. Overall, it is important to consider the
trade-off between communication overhead and other features
when designing decentralized architectures with FL.
Table III: Comparison of the flexibility of federated
communications between DFL, SDFL, and CFL.
Federated
Architecture
Communication
Times/Round
Node
Overhead
Total Transferred Data
V olume per Round (MB)
DFL 1 M · (N − 1) M · (N − 1)2
SDFL
h
N−1
2
i
2 · M 2 · M · N
h
N−1
2
i
*
CFL 1 M · N M · N
* It considers the additional communication required for leadership
transmission, which is not present in the DFL and CFL architectures.
3) Federation Models KPIs: The performance of the
federated model in solving the task for which it has been
created is critical. In other words, the performance indicates
the success of DFL in generating accurate predictions or
solving the intended problem. The following elements are used
for measurement [90].
• Model capacity . It is based on comparing the model
predictions with known values of the dependent variable
in a dataset. Some relevant metrics are model loss,
accuracy, sensitivity, specificity, and the time associated
with the convergence of the model.
• Complexity. It is influenced by both the functions of
the model trying to learn and the nature of the training
data. Some metrics are the number of layers in the
NN, activation functions, and algorithm aggregation
implemented by the federated model.
In addition to the above elements, federation models must
be trustworthy to ensure the technology is used to contribute
productively to the task. If they are not trustworthy, nodes
will not collaborate with these systems. The problem increases
when model parameters are deliberately distributed among
nodes in a topology. Therefore, it is necessary to determine
the confidence of the participants and the federated models
to ensure trustworthiness, where robust privacy and security
measures significantly contribute to this [92], [93].
• Participant trustworthiness . It defines the confidence
level of neighboring participants based on the model
parameters exchanged. There are two main metrics,
clustering-based trust, which determines the federation
nodes trustworthiness relying on clusters of participating
nodes; and distance-based trust, which is determined
based on the distance between participants and the
transmission time of the model parameters.
• Federated model trustworthiness . It provides confidence
in the local models of each participant in the federation.
Normally it is calculated in the aggregator nodes
before supplying the federated model to the rest of the
participants. The metrics are divided into several pillars:
accountability, analyzing the quality of the model life
cycle (client registry, anomaly monitoring); explainability,
providing clarification of the decision rationale (algorithm
class, model size, DFL configuration); fairness, ensuring
impartial and just decisions without discrimination
of protected groups (participation rate, discrimination
index); architecture design, creating a baseline behavior
for the management of participants in the federation (data
augmentation, regularized local loss); privacy, protecting
federated model data (perturbation, anonymization,
entropy); robustness, checking the resilience against
adversarial inputs (confidence score, loss sensitivity); and
reliability, predicting when an asset will fail or deteriorate
(client dropout rate, data provenance, data quality).
• Security and privacy . The preservation of security and
privacy is paramount in DFL, even while allowing
effective model training [95]. DP is a widely used method
that includes a privacy budget parameter, denoted as
epsilon (ϵ), serving as a metric to quantify the maximum
amount of privacy loss allowed. This budget diminishes
with each data-sharing instance, with smaller budgets
enhancing privacy but potentially impeding data utility.
Another critical parameter in DP is delta (δ), which
represents the probability of information inadvertently
being leaked. Other privacy-preserving methods, such
as HE and anonymization, also have vital performance
indicators. In HE, the degree of noise introduced can be
a significant parameter. Anonymization techniques, such
as k-anonymity and l-diversity, use k and l values as
performance metrics, ensuring privacy in DFL by making
it difficult to re-identify models within a federation [96].
F . DFL Optimizations
Despite the advantages of DFL, a series of optimization
mechanisms are necessary to guarantee the full efficiency of
the approach. In this sense, DFL includes three main elements
to optimize: federation nodes, federation communications, and
federation models (see Fig. 8).
1) Optimization of Federation Nodes: An important
optimization for improving node resources capabilities and
mobility in the federation is the selection of nodes to transmit
the model parameters. Node selection is divided into three
different strategies.
• Sequential selection of nodes . Participants are selected at
the beginning of the federation process, which iterates
over time [93].
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 14
FLEXIBILITYMOBILITY
RESOURCE CAPABILITIESOVERHEAD
TRUSTWORTHINESSPERFORMANCE
DFL OPTIMIZATIONS
Fig. 8: DFL optimizations.
• Random selection of nodes . It excludes resource
capabilities or network constraints from the participants.
In this sense, a subset of nodes is obtained in a fixed time
of the federated process to send the model parameters.
• Scheme schedule selection of nodes . This selection
strategy requires a node to act as an orchestrator of
the communication links and the characteristics of each
neighboring node. Furthermore, the controller can select
participants based on a preassigned probability calculated
according to participation in the federation [4].
Additionally, it is relevant to optimize traditional
aggregation algorithms such as Federated Averaging (FedAvg)
to make it more suitable for the node resource capabilities
[4]. FedAvg is a widely accepted heuristic algorithm used as
a baseline for star-structured topologies due to its simplicity
and empirical effectiveness. In this case, the aggregator node
obtains the model parameters of the neighboring nodes,
aggregating the average of the updates and computing the
resulting global model. It is also worth noting that while in
CFL, the FedAvg algorithm has been widely accepted as a
baseline, in DFL, no algorithm has risen among the others.
Customizations of FedAvg and new techniques focused
on decentralized scenarios have emerged in the literature
intending to adapt to DFL solutions.
• Decentralized Stochastic Gradient Descent (DSGD) . It
provides optimization for a set of objective functions
distributed over a network. Each node maintains
estimates of the optimal optimization step on information
concerning its cost function and exchanges these
estimates directly with the other nodes in the network
[129].
• FedPGA. It defines a partial gradient exchange
mechanism that leverages node-to-node bandwidth
to speed up communication time. At the same time, it
reduces the convergence rate by adapting the step size
of the stable gradient descent direction [97].
• Dynamic Average Consensus-based FL (DACFL) . It
transforms the aggregation of the DFL model into
a local training procedure as a discrete time series,
whose convergence guarantees convex objectives [130].
In the algorithm, nodes compute and update a local
solution to a subproblem and share the solution with
neighboring nodes. Moreover, the authors demonstrate
that the algorithm adapts to dynamic networks and
heterogeneous scenarios by tuning a node-specific local
parameter based on the node resources [5].
• Split Learning (SL) . This method, called SplitNN [99],
enables collaborative training of NNs without sharing
raw private data, but emphasizes the suitability for DFL
architectures. It employs split models instead of full
model replication in a DFL architecture. The training
participants hold replications of the shallower layers up
to a certain layer (i.e., the cut layer), while a specific
node holds the deeper layers.
• Decentralized FedAvg with Momentum (DFedAvgM) . It
uses SGD with momentum to train the local models
of the federation participants, communicating only with
their neighbors in an undirected graph. It provides a
better convergence rate and communication efficiency
than DSGD [131].
• DeceFL. It focuses on neighbor communications to
improve efficiency for both convex and non-convex loss
functions. It applies to a wide range of real-world medical
and industrial applications [132].
2) Optimization of Federation Communications:
Optimizing network flexibility and overhead is crucial
for addressing performance issues caused by continuous
data exchanges between participants. Concerning network
flexibility, it is necessary to have techniques that reduce
the number of exchanges in the network without losing
functionality during federation [133]. Several studies have
proposed reducing the number of bits transferred for
each worker update through data compression. However,
these studies do not consider the impact of data loss from
compression results, which could impair the learning accuracy
and affect convergence [103].
In the literature, different distributed optimization schemes
aim to maintain acceptable convergence rates in terms of
recurring iterations and device computation time. Some
examples are Decentralized Gradient Descent (DGD) [104],
decentralized Alternating Direction Method of Multipliers
(ADMM) [105], EXTRA [106], and ADMM based on
Jacobi-Proximal [107]. A recent contribution includes a
method that applies the Lloyd-Max algorithm to DFL to
minimize quantization distortion, with the resulting LM-
DFL algorithm able to adjust quantization levels adaptively
[102]. Other communication optimization mechanisms use an
incremental learning method to reduce costs by activating and
linking agents while keeping other nodes and links inactive.
These include Random Walk ADMM (W ADMM) [134],
Parallel Random Walk ADMM (PW-ADMM) [123] and Walk
Proximal Gradient (WPG) [135] which are commonly used in
increment-based approaches. Recent research has introduced
mechanisms that aim to optimize the balance between
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 15
improving the quality of the model and saving communication
resources, which can result in a more sustainable federation
policy [100]. These mechanisms typically offer an independent
selection of participants and fragments of the NN to be
transmitted, providing a promising alternative to traditional
optimizations. One such technique is FL-EOCD, leveraging
D2D communications and overlapped clustering to enable
decentralized aggregation, thereby reducing overall energy
consumption and latency while maintaining convergence rates
[58]. Further approaches, such as [136], implement latency
optimization strategies by incorporating Blockchain. The
latency optimization is achieved by strategically managing
data offloading decisions, power transmission, bandwidth
allocation, and computational resources, resulting in a highly
responsive system.
Regarding optimizing network overhead, the DFL approach
presents limitations in communication bandwidth between
nodes [71]. To address this issue, researchers have
explored different distribution schemes, such as quantization
and sparsification. For example, Quantized Sparse SGD
(QSGD) [109] and quantized ADMM [137] were proposed
to reduce network overhead when exchanging model
parameters. Furthermore, the Qsparse-local-SGD algorithm
[110] includes a combination of aggressive sparsification
with quantization and local computation along with error
compensation. However, these methods may decrease accuracy
to achieve lower communication costs [74]. With adequate
communication infrastructure, decentralized learning can
achieve accuracies like its centralized counterpart. In this
sense, the use of advanced technologies such as 5G [138]
or 6G [139] can help reduce communication limitations,
improving network bandwidth and enable faster and more
efficient data exchange. Other studies, such as [140], have
shown that decentralized SGD can outperform centralized
approaches in low-bandwidth networks. However, these
studies do not consider typical federated settings, such as non-
IID data among participants, limiting the applicability of their
results.
3) Optimization of Federation Models: It is necessary to
optimize federated models to avoid high processing demand on
the most constrained participants. In this sense, optimizations
are responsible for increasing the efficiency of the models
without sacrificing performance and trustworthiness.
In DFL, nodes often aim to train a state-of-the-art ML
model on a specified task. To increase model performance
and trustworthiness, researchers have developed new models
and improved existing solutions. The most popular ML model
is a NN, which achieves state-of-the-art results in many
tasks, such as image classification. Many DFL studies are
based on Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD), which can be
used to train NNs [110]. Another widely used algorithm
is a decision tree, which is more efficient to train and
easier to interpret than NNs. In particular, a tree-based
DFL is designed for federated training of single or multiple
decision trees, such as Gradient Boosting Decision Trees
(GBDTs) and Random Forests (RFs). GBDTs have been
especially popular recently due to their superior performance
in many classification and regression tasks [26]. Besides NNs
and trees, linear models such as Linear Regression (LR),
Logistic Regression, or Support Vector Machine (SVM) are
classic and easy-to-use models. To enhance the consistency of
models generated by each federation participant, algorithms
such as DFedSAM utilize gradient perturbation to produce
local flat models with uniformly low loss values [111]. In
non-IID scenarios where adaptive training models can be
challenging on resource-constrained devices, these models can
be particularly useful [108]. Furthermore, techniques such
as SwarmSGD jointly leverage non-blocking communication,
quantization, and local steps, allowing for better compensation
by training on more samples but with a lower quantization
level of model parameters. This technique is effective in
heterogeneous node data distributions and random topologies
[88].
In addition to the efficient models mentioned above, new
techniques have emerged in recent years to improve the
efficiency and performance of DFL. These techniques include
meta-learning, multitasking, and federated distillation. Meta-
learning aims to improve the efficiency and performance of
the model generated at each node by creating less complex
models capable of performing tasks in parallel. It uses
information from the activities performed to better adapt to
new tasks [112]. As a result, meta-learners generalize better
when trained with a more extensive set of practical tasks
and more data for each task. In this sense, the learner can
acquire knowledge and processing capacity distributed among
agents, adapting its model to the best-performing ones in the
network. Meta-learning often involves multitasking when ML
models are trained to perform multiple tasks simultaneously.
These models optimize metrics for each task and generate
a corresponding output [91]. Finally, federated distillation,
first introduced in 2015 as knowledge distillation, aims to
optimize federated models by performing model compression.
Specifically, it is a procedure to train a model using a second
NN as a reference instead of learning directly from the ground
truth of the data [141]. In this way, it allows several advantages
over more complex models: (i) more information can be
extracted from a single sample, (ii) training can be performed
with fewer examples, and (iii) labeled data are not needed.
All this offers less computation time and energy consumption
in the federated node [113]. A decentralized version of this
approach has been proposed in [114], where instead of having
a pre-trained model to imitate it, each model considers the
aggregated knowledge of the remaining participants’ models.
Finally, the most relevant optimization of federated models
for increasing trustworthiness is using DLT techniques,
providing reliability during model parameter updates in the
federation. They also facilitate the fair participation of nodes
during the federation. In such trust-based relationships, there
are two entities: the trustor and trustee node. For each
observation from the trustee, the trustor determines whether it
is an outlier, while the trustee node validates the contributions
provided by the trustor. To maintain the reputation of the
participating devices and ensure that all participants make
active and honest contributions to the model, the trustor node
i can generate a smart contract with the parameters of the
local model, which is validated by a set of trustee nodes
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 16
j [142]. DLT techniques also provide an added explanation
and robustness to federated models. The immutability of the
initialization and update of federated models is guaranteed
by DLT, maintaining a chronological log in the Blockchain.
Moreover, the fair participation of nodes in the federation is
further ensured by DLT.
IV. O PEN -SOURCE FRAMEWORKS FOR DFL
Building upon the storyline presented in Fig. 2, this section
responds to “ Q2. What DFL frameworks exist, and what
fundamentals do they provide? ” In this context, frameworks
serve as the bridge between the “Theoretical Overview”
with its fundamentals and “Practical Application” with its
application scenarios. This section introduces the most relevant
existing open-source frameworks for DFL. First, it discusses
the most mature and highly customized frameworks supported
by large companies. Then, it focuses on those more incipient
with limited functionality but notable research advances.
Table IV compares the main aspects of the frameworks
analyzed. The double horizontal line separates the mature
frameworks from the incipient ones.
A. Mature Frameworks
TensorFlow Federated (TFF) [143], developed by Google,
provides the building blocks for FL based on TensorFlow. It
includes three key components: models, federated computation
builders, and datasets. TFF can be deployed on multiple
machines, creating a rotating aggregator. Currently, TFF
does not consider any adversaries during FL training nor
provides privacy mechanisms. Other frameworks, such as
PySyft [144], provide interfaces for developers to implement
their training algorithm. While TFF is based on TensorFlow,
PySyft can work well with PyTorch and TensorFlow. This
framework provides multiple optional privacy mechanisms,
including secure multi-party computation and differential
privacy. Moreover, it can be deployed on a single machine or
multiple machines, where the communication between nodes is
performed using the WebSocket API. For privacy preservation,
SecureBoost [56] builds multi-part reinforcement trees with
an encryption strategy between different nodes. This solution
allows for different feature sets corresponding to a vertically
partitioned dataset. One of the advantages of SecureBoost is
that it provides remarkable accuracy across different topology
architectures without revealing information about each private
data provider.
Other frameworks, such as FederatedScope [145] and
FedML [146], allow lower-level management of the deployed
architecture. The first one employs an event-driven architecture
to provide great flexibility in describing node behaviors.
It allows learning objectives and backends to be added
and coordinated in an FL life cycle with synchronous or
asynchronous training strategies. In addition, it includes
privacy protection, attack simulation, and automatic tuning.
In addition, FedML offers a platform for FL benchmarking
based on PyTorch and utilizes the Message Passing Interface
(MPI) protocol, gRPC, or MQTT for communication. This
framework comprises two main modules: FedML-core,
which implements the training engine and the distributed
communication infrastructures, and FedML-API, which is built
on top of FedML-core and provides training models, datasets,
and FL algorithms. Finally, FedML supports three computing
paradigms: standalone simulation, distributed computing, and
on-device training. Along the same lines, LEAF [147]
provides only benchmark functionality of the deployed
architectures. In this sense, it uses distributed datasets and
partitioning mechanisms that other frameworks can leverage
to complement its functionality.
B. Incipient Solutions
BrainTorrent [148] is an FL framework without a
central server explicitly aimed at medical applications.
With no need for a central authority to oversee the
training process, BrainTorrent provides highly dynamic P2P
communications where each medical center communicates
directly, also offering robust training of participants through
asynchronous updates achieving performance similar to on-
device model training. Although the framework focuses
on image segmentation, it can be extended to other data
and models. Similarly, Scatterbrained [43] facilitates the
construction of both CFL and DFL systems. In the latter,
it can create a customized communication system based on
ZeroMQ, corresponding to a communications library based
on UDP. Nodes can have a specific role: (i) leech, in which
nodes listen for broadcasts but do not share data; (ii) offline,
where nodes do not listen or broadcast data; (iii) peer,
where participants listen and broadcast data; and (iv) seeding,
where nodes broadcast but do not listen to incoming data. In
addition, it allows the use of different ML frameworks such
as TensorFlow, Scikit-learn, or PyTorch.
Other studies present DFL models based on the
InterPlanetary File System (IPFS) [149]. In this sense, the
authors deployed a framework called IPLS, whose nodes are
interconnected and perform federated model training based
on the operation of one or more network participants. Any
participant can initiate the federated training process or join
an existing one. This solution shows robustness in the face
of dynamic nodes and intermittent connectivity, ensuring
limited resource usage and convergence of the federated
model. Similarly, TrustFed [142] uses IPFS and Blockchain
smart contracts to maintain the reputation of participants in a
centralized or decentralized network. In this way, compelling
participants to make active and honest contributions to the
federated model. In contrast, other frameworks such as
FLoBC [150] deploy a Blockchain mechanism to ensure
the decentralization of nodes. In this sense, the framework
compares and contrasts the effects of the trainer-validator
relationship, reward-penalty policy, and model synchronization
schemes on overall system performance. The authors
demonstrate that using this framework enables the deployment
of DFL systems with performance similar to more centralized
architectures. Similarly, BLADE-FL [151] uses Blockchain to
mitigate vulnerabilities during federation. It offers robustness
against malfunctions, distrustful connections, and external
threats by having each client compete to generate a block
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 17
Table IV: Comparison of mature and incipient DFL frameworks.
Reference OS Federation Architecture Aggregation
Algorithms
Communication
Protocol
Security and
Privacy Data Type Scenario BenchmarkingParticipant Type Aggregator Node
TFF [143] Linux
MacOS
Cross-silo Centralized
Decentralized
Median
FedAvg
FedProx
gRPC ✓ Time series
Images
Simulation ✓
PySyft [144] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Mobile
Cross-silo
Cross-device
Centralized
Decentralized
FedAvg Websockets ✓ Images Simulation
Real
✓
SecureBoost [56] Linux
MacOS
Cross-silo Centralized
Decentralized
FedAvg
GBDT
gRPC ✓ Time series Simulation ✗
FederatedScope [145] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Mobile
Cross-silo
Cross-device
Centralized FedAvg
FedOpt
gRPC ✓ Time series
Images
Simulation
Real
✓
FedML [146] Linux
MacOS
Cross-silo Centralized
Decentralized
FedAvg
FedOpt
FedNova
gRPC
MPI
MQTT
✓ Time series
Images
Simulation
Real
✓
LEAF [147] Linux
MacOS
Cross-silo Centralized
Decentralized
- - - Time series
Images
Simulation ✓
BrainTorrent [148] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Decentralized FedAvg N/S ✗ Time series Simulation
Real
✗
Scatterbrained [43] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
FedAvg ZeroMQ ✗ Time series
Images
Simulation ✗
IPLS [149] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Decentralized FedAvg P2P ✓ Time series
Images
Simulation
Real
✓
TrustFed [142] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
FedAvg P2P ✓ Time series
Images
Simulation ✗
FLoBC [150] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Decentralized FedAvg HTTP (REST API) ✗ Time series
Images
Simulation
Real
✓
BLADE-FL [151] Windows
Linux
Cross-device Decentralized Custom
algorithm
P2P ✓ Images Simulation ✓
DISCO [15] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Mobile
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Custom
FedAvg
peer.js ✓ Time series
Images
Simulation ✗
CMFL [152] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Decentralized Median
Trimmed Mean
Krum
Multi-Krum
P2P ✓ Time series
Images
Simulation ✓
DeFL [40] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Decentralized Custom
algorithm
N/S ✗ Time series
Images
Simulation
Real
✓
FL-SEC [12] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Decentralized FedAvg N/S ✓ Time series Simulation ✓
DisPFL [38] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Decentralized FedAvg
Ditto
FOMO
Sub-FedAvg
P2P ✗ Time series
Images
Simulation
Real
✗
GossipFL [70] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-device Decentralized FedAvg
S-FedAvg
D-PSGD
CHOCO-SGD
P2P ✗ Images Simulation ✓
Fedstellar [153] Windows
Linux
MacOS
Cross-silo
Cross-device
Centralized
Decentralized
Semi-Decentralized
FedAvg
Krum
TrimmedMean
Median
P2P
HTTP (REST API)
✓ Time series
Images
Simulation
Real
✓
N/S(Not Specified) by the authors. The double horizontal line indicates the separation between mature and incipient frameworks
before local training in the next federation round. The system
also addresses training deficiency caused by lazy clients and
optimizes resource allocation.
In addition to the above solutions, some frameworks
explore new applicability technologies to generate DFL
scenarios. DISCO [15] is a framework presented by the
EPFL Machine Learning and Optimization Laboratory that
creates an easy-to-use platform that allows non-specialists
to participate in collaborative learning. This platform
is based on Javascript, supporting arbitrary DL tasks
and model architectures via TF.js and relying on P2P
communications. Additionally, DISCO provides mechanisms
to ensure communication efficiency, privacy preservation,
fault tolerance, and deployment customization. Moreover,
frameworks seek to improve the robustness of their privacy
techniques. In this case, [152] presented a serverless
framework named Committee Mechanism-based Federated
Learning (CMFL), orchestrated by a committee system
deploying selection strategies of model parameters during
federation. In contrast to the other frameworks, this one
implements several aggregation algorithms such as median,
trimmed mean, Krum, and Multi-Krum, evaluating them in
terms of robustness and efficiency. Regarding the security and
privacy of the scenarios, [12] and [15] provide frameworks
capable of ensuring the integrity and confidentiality of the
communications and data exchanged. Both alternatives present
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 18
custom aggregation algorithms to process image and time
series data.
Finally, other frameworks in the literature allow the
deployment of cross-silo-based solutions, creating robust
topologies of nodes that exchange information using P2P
networks. In this case, [40] removed the central server by
aggregating the weights at each participating node, and the
weights of only the current training round are maintained
and synchronized among all nodes. This framework has been
evaluated on two widely adopted public datasets, CIFAR-10
[154], and Sentiment140 [155], demonstrating convergence
against more common threats with minimal accuracy loss,
achieving up to 100x reduction in storage overhead and up
to 12x reduction in network overhead compared to state-
of-the-art DFL approaches. Similar to the previous solution,
the authors of [38] allow further savings in communication
and computational costs. In this sense, the authors proposed
a decentralized sparse training technique, where each local
model only maintains a fixed number of active parameters
throughout the local training and P2P communication
process. They employ aggregation algorithms such as Ditto,
FOMO, and Sub-FedAvg to enhance efficiency. Furthermore,
the authors demonstrated that the framework allows easy
adaptation to heterogeneous local clients with different
computational complexities. Similarly, GossipFL [70] presents
a novel approach to address communication challenges in IoT
scenarios characterized by intermittent connections between
participants. The framework utilizes sparsification techniques
and a unique gossip matrix generation method, employing
algorithms such as S-FedAvg, D-PSGD, and CHOCO-SGD to
optimize communication traffic while preserving convergence.
The efficacy is demonstrated across various datasets, such as
MNIST and CIFAR10, achieving model accuracies of up to
98%. Building on these advancements, Fedstellar [153] offers
a versatile platform for DFL training that addresses common
limitations in existing frameworks. It efficiently manages
heterogeneous topologies and adapts the federation to physical
or virtual deployments. In a real-world cyberattack detection
employing single-board devices and a fully connected network,
Fedstellar obtained a 91% F1 score. Furthermore, in a
virtualized scenario using the MNIST dataset, the platform
delivered a compelling F1 score of 98% with DFL and 97.3%
with SDFL while reducing model convergence training time
by 32% relative to CFL.
V. A PPLICATION SCENARIOS
Following the storyline presented in Fig. 2, this section
responds to “ Q3. Which are the main characteristics of the
most relevant scenarios of DFL? ” In particular, this section
provides a review of existing works classified according to
the application scenario: (i) healthcare, (ii) Industry 4.0, (iii)
mobile services, (iv) military, and (v) vehicles. These scenarios
combine most of the literature work, thus giving a great
overview of current DFL applicability. For each scenario, the
following aspects are highlighted: the goal, the participants
during federation, the ML algorithm used, and the aggregation
method employed.
Beyond the previously discussed scenarios, DFL is also
relevant in emerging areas such as smart cities and metaverse,
where it enhances urban planning and service provision,
all while facilitating privacy-preserving data sharing between
real and virtual entities [156]. In the realm of swarm
robotics, DFL enables asynchronous knowledge sharing
and task coordination [157]. In the energy and utilities
sector, DFL supports predictive maintenance and demand
forecasting, contributing to operational efficiency across
companies [158]. Finally, the telecommunications sector
benefits from DFL in optimizing network performance and
anomaly detection, allowing network providers to share
insights without compromising proprietary information [159].
However, the challenges of these domains need to be further
explored to determine the scope of DFL.
A. Healthcare
Cooperation between research institutes, hospitals, and
federal agencies is essential in modern healthcare systems to
improve healthcare standards. However, transferring patient
information between these entities can be challenging due
to regulations like the General Data Protection Regulation
(GDPR) or the European Health Data Space (EHDS).
Through DFL, each hospital or institute only needs to
share the parameters of the local model to obtain an
accurate diagnosis model, thereby preserving patients’ privacy.
Notably, the successful application of DFL-based approaches
in the healthcare sector is evident from recent studies, as
demonstrated in the relevant articles presented in Table V.
The first study to present the privacy issues of server use
in healthcare is [160]. The authors noted the challenges in
achieving a trade-off between global learning of the model
and local information from each data source due to the large
number of data sources with varying amounts and properties
of data. To address this, they proposed a new strategy called
Federated-Autonomous Deep Learning (FADL), where the
first layer of the NN model is trained in a federated way
using data from all sources. In contrast, the other model
layers are trained locally in each data source. Their approach
demonstrated an accuracy similar to the centralized analysis
and outperformed regular FL for distributed electronic health
records.
In the same way as the previous work, Huang et al.
[128] proposed a community-based FL algorithm to predict
mortality and hospital stay time. Electronic medical records
were clustered into communities inside each hospital based
on standard medical aspects. Each cluster learned and shared
a particular ML model customized for each community rather
than a general global model shared among all hospitals. In
this work, a participant with an aggregator role was in charge
of converting patients’ drug features into privacy-preserving
representations. The authors of [162] introduced an algorithm
to perform local updates during several iterations, enabling
communication between nodes and improving communication
efficiency for DFL. This approach was tested on simulations
with real-world electronic medical records, demonstrating its
effectiveness in Alzheimer’s disease detection compared to
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 19
Table V: Comparison of DFL solutions focused on healthcare.
Ref. Year Goal Federation
Architecture
Topology Scenario ML
Model
Aggregation
Algorithm
Local Model
Aggregation
Client
Selection
Dataset
[160] 2018 Improve the accuracy of the CFL
approximation by training parts of the
model in a decentralized way and others
using specific data sources
Cross-silo Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation Three-layered NN Custom
algorithm
Synchronous Sequential eICU-CRD [161]
[128] 2019 Decrease the cost of communications
between hospitals and the aggregator by
using a clinical community data clustering
algorithm for disease detection
Cross-silo Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation K-Means FedAvg Synchronous Sequential eICU-CRD [161]
[162] 2020 Improve the communication efficiency for
fully DFL over a graph without loss of
optimality of the solutions
Cross-device Decentralized Real Custom
model
Custom
algorithm
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Sequential Private
[163] 2021 Deep FL framework for decentralized
healthcare systems that maintain user
privacy
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation Custom
model
Custom
algorithm
Synchronous Scheduling Private
[164] 2021 Facilitate the integration of any medical data
from any data owner worldwide without
violating privacy laws
Cross-silo Decentralized Real Custom
model
Custom
aggregator
Asynchronous Scheduling PBMC transcriptome [165]
Chest X-ray [166]
[167] 2022 Secure valuable hospital biomedical data
useful for clinical research organizations,
use of Blockchain and smart contracts
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation CNN FedA VG Asynchronous Sequential Private
[16] 2022 Privacy and protection of medical data
exchanged between healthcare entities
Cross-silo Decentralized Real ResNet18
ResNet50
DenseNet121
Custom
algorithm
Synchronous Sequential ImageNet [168]
Private
[98] 2022 Detect brain tumor segmentation, using
representative clinical datasets
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Real U-Net CFA
FedPer
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random BRATS [169]
Private
[90] 2022 Detect misconduct model on specific sites
from any learning iteration
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation GloreChain FedAvg Asynchronous Sequential Cancer Biomarker [170]
[2] 2022 Collaboratively training between healthcare
devices for creating a robust model without
raw data exchange
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation 3D CNN Custom FedAvg
(RingA VG)
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random COVID-19 CT [171]
Eye Disease [172]
Skin Cancer [173]
[21] 2022 Ring topology for DGM to ensure security
and privacy in medical scenarios
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation GAN FedAvg Asynchronous Sequential MNIST [174]
[175] 2022 Exploit concepts from experience repetition
and adversarial generation research
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation GAN FedAvg
FedProx
FedBN
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random X-ray data [176], [177]
HAM10000 [178]
[179] 2023 Privacy-preserving decentralized approach
while supporting efficient communications
Cross-silo Decentralized Simulation N/S Custom
algorithm
Synchronous Random MNIST [174]
classical methods. Similarly, Elayan et al. [163] proposed a
framework to train on skin lesion images using smartphones.
They further utilized TFL to overcome the need for large,
labeled data. They also proposed an automated training data-
acquiring process and evaluated the algorithm on skin diseases,
leveraging TL techniques to address the problem of a lack of
healthcare data in generating DL models. Moreover, Warnat-
Herresthal et al. [164] followed a similar approach to ensure
the privacy of medical data exchanged between cross-silos.
The advancement of clinical research and new scientific
discoveries relies on enabling data mobility, including
medical records. In this context, various schemes have been
proposed to exchange medical records using Blockchain
and smart contracts to ensure appropriate data privacy and
protection. Salim and Park [167] compared the results of
their decentralized Convolutional Neural Network (CNN)
model for Electronic Health Records (EHR) with a private
Interplanetary File System (IPFS) and found promising
results in accuracy, sensitivity, and specificity, similar to
the traditional centralized model. In contrast, Nguyen et al.
[16] discussed the use of federated distillation to decrease
model complexity, using a private dataset called The Noisy
Blind consisting of 1198 original images collected from
four clinics. Their solution provided superior performance
to traditional centralized training when nodes comprise low-
quality data, which is common in healthcare. Similarly, the
authors of [98] focused on medical image prediction for brain
tumor segmentation, enabling the collaboration of multiple
institutions by sharing their local computational models and
training a U-Net model. This approach reached a target
Dice Similarity Coefficient (DSC) above 85% using private
data from patients’ devices (e.g., heart rate, blood oxygen
saturation).
B. Industry 4.0
The use of federated and decentralized techniques has
increased considerably in Industry 4.0 to overcome the lack of
communication between devices and sensors without needing a
central node. As shown in Table VI, several recent studies have
shown promising results in applying DFL-based approaches in
industrial settings.
In [8], the authors discussed the opportunities and
applications of DFL in automated and networked
industrial systems supported by Device-to-Device (D2D)
communications. The authors demonstrated the integration
of the DFL approach into the sensing-decision-action loop,
improving knowledge discovery operations. The system
evaluation showed a convergence of the collaboration model
in cross-device environments with minimal synchronous
and asynchronous communications. Following the same
direction, the authors of [181] applied cognitive computing
in a simulated industrial scenario. This technique models the
reasoning process of the human brain, having a progressive
welcome in Industry 4.0 automation. This work implemented
a DFL scenario supported by Blockchain and a Distributed
Approximate Newton (DANE) aggregation method with
advanced checks and random node selection. The results
of an extensive evaluation and assessment showed accuracy
values between 0.74 and 0.82. Ma, Wang, and Li [52] defined
Q-DFL for a quantized selection of network nodes. The
proposal contained two phases: (i) a local model was trained
with the SGD algorithm on each IIoT device, and then the
parameters of the quantized model were exchanged among
neighboring nodes; and (ii) a consensus mechanism was
designed to ensure that the local models converged to the
same global model. Subsequent simulation for the MobileNet
model revealed its performance trade-off between system
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 20
Table VI: Comparison of DFL solutions focused on Industry 4.0.
Ref. Year Goal Federation
Architecture
Topology Scenario ML
Model
Aggregation
Algorithm
Local Model
Aggregation
Client
Selection
Dataset
[8] 2021 Explore emerging FL opportunities using
next-generation networked and autonomous
industrial systems (e.g., robots, vehicles,
drones)
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Real DNN FedAvg Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random MIMO radar [180]
[181] 2021 Decentralized paradigm for big data-based
cognitive computing
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation CNN DANE Synchronous Random CIFAR-10 [154]
[52] 2021 A method for D2D network in industrial IoT
devices for improving the convergence of
communications
Cross-device Decentralized Real MobileNet FedAvg
(consensus)
Asynchronous Random MNIST [174]
[126] 2021 Anomaly detection ML models in non-IID
scenarios, including mechanisms to locally
rebalance training datasets
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation Four-layered FCNN P2PK-SMOTE Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random N-BaIoT [182]
[183] 2022 A method for decentralized anomaly
detection using neural networks, offering
a comparison with traditional federated
architectures
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation Custom
model
FedAvg Asynchronous Sequential IoT23 [184]
[185] 2022 A BoEI framework that integrates an
innovative DFL for cyberattack detection in
IIoT
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation Custom
model
Fed-Trust Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random TON_IoT [186]
LITNET-2020 [187]
[93] 2022 Secure application approach to seal and
sign asynchronous and synchronous FL
collaborative tasks
Cross-silo
Cross-device
Decentralized Real Custom
model
Custom
algorithm
Asynchronous Sequential Private
[59] 2022 Generic decentralized FL framework for
training distributed models in inherently
heterogeneous IoT environments
Cross-device Decentralized Real Custom
model
Custom
algorithm
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random Private
[188] 2022 Cooperative machine learning organized by
physically close nodes
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation Two-layered FCNN W AFL Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random MNIST [174]
[17] 2022 User-defined privacy-preserving framework
for industrial metaverses
Cross-silo
Cross-device
Decentralized Simulation N/S Custom
FedAvg
Asynchronous Scheduling Private
[189] 2023 A method that leverages Blockchain to
improve model quality and reduce latency
Cross-silo Decentralized Simulation Two-layered MLP FedAvg Asynchronous Random MNIST [174]
[138] 2023 Cooperative use of Blockchain and FL while
preserving privacy using 5G
Cross-silo Decentralized Simulation N/S Custom
algorithm
Synchronous Random CIFAR-10 [154]
FEMNIST [147]
N/S(Not Specified) by the authors
information flow consumption, time delay, and energy cost.
Cybersecurity is also an important consideration in Industry
4.0, and several studies have investigated the use of DFL for
anomaly and attack detection, such as the work published in
[126]. The authors developed anomaly detection ML models
for non-IID scenarios and included mechanisms to locally
rebalance the training datasets through the synthetic generation
of data points from the minority class. Using different metrics
to evaluate the model performance on the N-BaIoT dataset,
they obtained a convergence close to 75% of False Negative
Rate (FNR) and recall. Another study, conducted by Lian and
Su [183], discussed a similar approach with the IoT23 dataset
[184], obtaining a model convergence 30% faster than in the
previous study with an increase of only 3% in the overhead
of the participants.
Apart from ensuring the reliability of IIoT and the
connectivity of industrial objects, Abdel-Basset, Moustafa,
and Hawash [185] proposed a Blockchain-orchestrated Edge
Intelligence (BoEI) framework for cyberattack detection in
IIoT. The framework uses a temporal convolutional generative
network to enable semi-supervised learning from semi-
labeled data. The authors used TON_IoT [186] and LITNET-
2020 [187] to validate the robustness and efficiency of the
framework over different cyberattack detection approaches.
Several studies have also addressed the synchronous or
asynchronous operation of nodes within the network topology.
In this regard, Pinyoanuntapong et al. [59] implemented
a solution to mitigate high communication congestion in
decentralized networks, leading to robust distributed model
training in heterogeneous IoT environments where stragglers
(i.e., slow devices) are commonplace due to varying
computation and network speeds of IoT devices. Similarly,
Ochiai et al. [188] proposed a similar approach for ad-hoc
wireless environments, achieving an average accuracy of 95%
for the test IID dataset compared to on-device training, which
obtained 84.7%. Mothukuri et al. [93] proposed a Blockchain-
based approach and Hyperledger Fabric with a gamification
component for integrating a secure application to seal and
sign asynchronous and synchronous DFL collaborative tasks.
Their results demonstrated that security enhancements improve
the FL process using a custom aggregation algorithm and
asynchronous communications. Finally, Kang et al. [17]
enhanced privacy in the industrial metaverse by using a
DFL framework with cross-chain power for decentralized,
secure, and privacy-preserving data training in physical and
virtual spaces. The framework uses a hierarchical Blockchain
architecture with the main chain and multiple sub-chains.
Ranathunga et al. [189] introduced a similar cross-silo
architecture using a network of aggregators to optimize model
quality, minimize convergence time, and improve system
performance in various industrial applications. Similarly,
Singh, Yang, and Park [138] proposed an approach for Industry
5.0. This scheme allowed local learning updates within the
different departments of the industry using 5G. The validation
outcomes showed an accuracy of 93.5% in a 50% active node.
C. Mobile Services
The proliferation of interconnected mobile devices and the
development of advanced intelligent models have facilitated
the emergence of decentralized approaches that offer increased
efficiency and optimal training of models involved in various
everyday tasks. To this end, DFL-based approaches have
gained significant attention in mobile services, as demonstrated
by the literature in Table VII.
Most research in this field has focused on leveraging edge
computing to bring processing and data storage closer to the
source of the request, thereby improving response times and
conserving bandwidth on constrained devices. In this context,
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 21
Table VII: Comparison of DFL solutions focused on mobile services.
Ref. Year Goal Federation
Architecture
Topology Scenario ML
Model
Aggregation
Algorithm
Local Model
Aggregation
Client
Selection
Dataset
[7] 2021 Reduce the number of directly connected
end devices, avoiding the overhead of
unnecessary local updates
Cross-silo
Cross-device
Centralized
Decentralized
Real CNN
MLP
FedAvg Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random MNIST [174]
[190] 2021 Novel approach based on continuous
authentication of users trained by an
organized peer-to-peer federation involving
different organizations
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation Custom
model
FedAvg Asynchronous Scheduling Private
[191] 2021 Blockchain-based FL scheme to strengthen
communication security and data privacy
protection in DITENs
Cross-silo
Cross-device
Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation DNN Custom
algorithm
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random MNIST [174]
FMNIST [192]
[193] 2022 Simulation tool to capture the decentralized
and asynchronous nature of FL operation in
conjunction with DTL techniques
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation U-Net FedAvg Asynchronous Sequential BRATS [169]
Private
[68] 2022 Reputation scheme to balance the weights
between trust values of parameters and bid
prices
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation Four-layered FNN FedAvg Synchronous Scheduling MNIST [174]
[18] 2022 Novel distributed validation weighting
scheme to evaluate the performance of a
mobile node in the federation versus a
distributed validation set
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation Two-layered CNN Custom
algorithm
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Sequential CIFAR-10 [154]
CIFAR-100 [154]
EMNIST [194]
[72] 2022 Decentralized recommender system based
on the principles of gossip learning
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation GMF
PRME-G
FedAvg
FedFast
Reptile
Synchronous Scheduling Foursqueare-NYC [195]
Gowalla-NYC [196]
MovieLens [197]
[73] 2022 Gossip-based system to maximize social
awareness among nodes, improving
reliability and latency
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation N/S Custom
algorithm
Asynchronous Sequential Facebook [198]
[199] 2023 Federated GNN supporting supervised
and unsupervised learning with security
measures
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation GCN
GAT
Custom
algorithm
Synchronous Squential Facebook [198]
LastFM [200]
[201] 2023 Privacy-preserving P2P learning for
asynchronous and collaborative tasks.
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation MobileNetv2
BLSTM
Custom
algorithm
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random CIFAR-10 [154]
Avito [202]
IMDb [203]
[204] 2023 Personalized and fully decentralized FL
algorithm using knowledge distillation
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation Three-layered NN
CNN
Custom
algorithm
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random IoT identification [205]
EMNIST [194]
[206] 2023 Decentralized and privacy-preserving FL for
improved performance and scalability
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation CNN FedAvg Synchronous Random MNIST [174]
N/S(Not Specified) by the authors
Wang et al. [7] proposed a novel solution that deployed
mobile edge nodes at various network locations to act as
communication hubs between the cloud and end devices.
This approach effectively sidesteps the latency associated
with high server concurrency. Moreover, the proposed method
filters unnecessary models and communications using cosine
similarity. Experimental results showed that the proposed
scheme reduces the number of local updates by 60% compared
to CFL and increases the convergence speed of the evaluated
model by 10.3%. Additionally, Monschein et al. [190]
addressed the challenge of acquiring large amounts of data to
train powerful ML models, which is often an overwhelming
task for a single organization. The authors proposed a
methodology combining the establishment of continuous user-
based authentication with federated and decentralized data
governance.
As in the previous scenarios, DLT is recurrently used to
ensure communications in decentralized scenarios. In this
sense, Lu et al. [191] conducted a theoretical analysis to
enhance communication security and protect data privacy in
Digital Twin Edge Networks (DITENs). The proposed scheme
demonstrated significant improvements in communication
efficiency and data security for IoT applications, as confirmed
by numerical results. Wilhelmi, Guerra, and Dini [193] studied
the impact of ledger inconsistencies on DFL performance.
The study employed a reliable simulation tool that captures
the decentralized and asynchronous nature of Blockchain
operation. Qi et al. [68] proposed a hybrid Blockchain-based
incentive mechanism that addresses similar challenges. The
authors leveraged smart contracts and dynamic reputation
score calculation of each DFL participant. In contrast to
previous studies, performance is evaluated against malicious
or non-honest nodes. In edge computing settings where P2P
communication is commonly used for exchanging model
parameters between nodes, an efficient algorithm named CoCo
was introduced in [18]. This algorithm integrates topology
construction optimization and model compression to accelerate
DFL. Extensive simulation results show that CoCo achieves a
ten-fold speedup and reduces the communication cost by 50%
on average compared to existing DFL baselines.
The rise of decentralized scenarios has enabled new
applications such as recommender systems and social net-
works. In particular, Belal et al. [72] introduced PEPPER, a
decentralized recommender system based on gossip learning
principles. The system extracts relevant content for users
to aid them in their daily activities, such as finding
relevant places to visit, content to consume, or items to
buy. In PEPPER, users gossip about model updates and
aggregate them asynchronously. By conducting experiments
on three real datasets implementing two use cases, location
registration recommendation and movie recommendation, the
authors demonstrated that their solution converges up to
42% faster than other decentralized solutions. Furthermore,
Khelghatdoust and Mahdavi [73] proposed a Decentralized
Online Social Network (DOSN) based on gossip to address the
privacy and scalability issues of centralized social networks.
The authors observed almost a 30% reduction in search latency
and a 10% improvement in communication reliability through
trusted contacts. These results demonstrate the potential of
decentralized approaches in providing efficient solutions for
modern applications such as recommender systems and social
networks. To improve the previous scenarios, Pan et al.
[199] utilized a tree constructor to improve representation
capability given the limited structural information and a Monte
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 22
Table VIII: Comparison of DFL solutions related to the military scenario.
Ref. Year Goal Federation
Architecture
Topology Scenario ML
Model
Aggregation
Algorithm
Local Model
Aggregation
Client
Selection
Dataset
[208] 2020 Federated learning-based security
architecture for jamming attack detection
for FANET
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation Three-layered NN FedAvg Asynchronous Random CRAWDAD [209]
NS3 FANET [210]
[211] 2020 Distributed defense solution for sustainable
society using the features of Blockchain
technology and federated learning
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation CNN FedAvg Synchronous Random Custom
dataset
[51] 2021 DFL solution with a fully connected
network between battlefield devices
employing a method of random walks and
alternate directions during federation
Cross-device Decentralized Real ELM ISPW-ADMM Asynchronous Random Private
[212] 2021 Novel architecture that allows FL within
UA V networks without a central entity
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation CNN FedAvg Asynchronous Random N/S
[19] 2021 Secure framework for UA V-assisted mobile
crowdsensing to promote high-quality
model sharing
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation Custom
model
Custom
FedAvg
Synchronous Scheduling N/S
[65] 2021 Precoding and decoding strategies for D2D
communication
Cross-device Decentralized Real Custom
model
FedAvg Synchronous Scheduling BRATS [169]
[213] 2022 Novel integration of Blockchain and FL
in UA V edge computing networks and
associated challenges and solutions
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation N/S Custom
FedA VG
Asynchronous Sequential N/S
[42] 2022 Cross-domain authentication of UA Vs using
multi-signature smart contracts
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation CNN Custom
algorithm
Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random EMNIST [194]
[214] 2023 Resource-efficient framework for mmWave
aerial-terrestrial integrated networks using
UA Vs
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation N/S Custom
algorithm
Asynchronous Scheduling MNIST [174]
CIFAR-10 [154]
[215] 2023 Feasibility and adaptability of DFL in
maritime transportation
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation Fully-connected ANN Custom
algorithm
Synchronous Random Private
N/S(Not Specified) by the authors
Carlo Markov Chain-based algorithm to mitigate workload
imbalance caused by degree heterogeneity. Finally, it is
worth mentioning that other studies have explored the use of
innovative techniques in DFL, such as P2P with knowledge
distillation, for various applications such as social network
scenarios or IoT device identification [201], [204], [206].
D. Military
The military scenario has also yielded numerous
improvements in DFL communications between different
devices on the battlefield. A clear example is the European
Future Combat Air System (FCAS) program [207], the
largest European armament effort since World War II, where
unmanned aircraft belong to a decentralized and collaborative
system during combat missions. Table VIII highlights the
most relevant items in the military scenario where DFL-based
approaches are applied.
Flying Ad-hoc Network (FANET) is a type of network that
applies DFL as a promising way to train collaborative and
decentralized models. One challenge in this network is the
evasion of malicious attacks, such as jamming. In jamming
attacks, adversaries disrupt the victim network communication
by generating interference at the receiver side, making it
difficult for the intended signals to be correctly received and
processed. For this problem, Mowla et al. [208] proposed
security measures to prevent node jamming by creating a
client group prioritization technique leveraging the Dempster-
Shafer theory and using asynchronous communications to
exchange model parameters. The results provided an accuracy
of 82.01% for the CRAWDAD dataset and 89.73% for the
NS3 FANET dataset. Additionally, Sharma, Park, and Cho
[211] discussed using DFL in the Internet of Battlefield
Things (IoBT) as a defense system employing AI to strengthen
the armed forces. The authors rely on the characteristics of
Blockchain technology to obtain high accuracy and a random
device selection. A custom dataset consisting of several drone
detection datasets [216] and images [217] is used to evaluate
the effectiveness of the proposed model, obtaining an accuracy
rate of 99% at the fog layer. Xiao et al. [51] presented an
Inexact Parallel Random Walk Alternate Direction Multiplier
Method (ISPW-ADMM) applied to fully connected networks.
Then, a UA V communication scenario was deployed and
compared with traditional methods such as W-ADMM, PW-
ADMM, DGD, and distributed-ADMM (D-ADMM). Qu et al.
[212] proposed a similar solution, where the authors provided
three critical considerations: (i) the average loss achieved by
DFL is similar to the one obtained in a centralized approach;
(ii) for each UA V , the loss value after 60 rounds is similar to
the achieved in the centralized approach; and (iii) the training
latency is always more negligible in DFL since it does not
need to broadcast the model parameters.
Alternative solutions have been proposed to address the
issue of secure DFL for UA V-assisted Mobile Crowdsensing
(MC). For instance, Wand et al. [19] introduced a DFL
approach that utilizes Blockchain to securely exchange local
model updates and verify contributions without a central node
in a cross-device scenario. In the same way, Shi et al. [65]
proposed a consensus phase based on additive noise at each
iteration of the algorithm, which enhanced the robustness
of the solution to changes in wireless network topology.
The solution converged linearly in a binary classification
using MNIST. Furthermore, Zhu et al. [213] used the same
technology among multiple untrusted parties with anonymous,
immutable, and distributed characteristics, achieving similar
results in performance for UA V intelligent edge computing
networks to the previous study. Another study by Feng et al.
[42] followed a similar approach, utilizing HFL and non-IID
data in a fully connected network. The authors implemented
cross-domain UA V authentication through multi-signature
smart contracts, with global model updates computed using
these smart contracts instead of a centralized server. Recently,
decentralized model dissemination has emerged as a promising
approach for DFL in mmWave aerial-terrestrial integrated
networks. To this end, Al-Abiad et al. [214] presented an
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 23
Table IX: Comparison of DFL solutions dealing with vehicular scenarios.
Ref. Year Goal Federation
Architecture
Topology Scenario ML
Model
Aggregation
Algorithm
Local Model
Aggregation
Client
Selection
Dataset
[20] 2020 Proactive caching scheme where vehicles
are trained from sparse data, mitigating
privacy risks
Cross-device Decentralized Real CF-V AE FedAvg Asynchronous Random MovieLens [197]
[219] 2020 Asynchronous FL-based approach for
efficient and secure data sharing
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation Custom NN FedAvg Asynchronous Scheduling N/S
[220] 2020 Autonomous Blockchain-based powered
learning design for a vehicular
communication network
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation N/S oVML Synchronous
Asynchronous
Random N/S
[22] 2021 Novel method proposed by DFL with
P2P communication between autonomous
vehicles
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation CNN Custom
algorithm
Synchronous Schematic MNIST [174]
KITTI [221]
[3] 2022 DFL system to increase road user and object
classification capability based on Lidar data
Cross-device Centralized
Decentralized
Simulation PointNet ML Custom
FedAvg
Synchronous Random nuScenes [222]
[223] 2023 Reinforcement Learning with FL agent
for predictive QoS in teleoperated driving
scenarios
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation DNN Custom
algorithm
Asynchronous Random KITTI [221]
[224] 2023 Blockchain-enhanced DFL for efficient and
privacy-protective data sharing
Cross-device Decentralized Simulation CNN FedAvg Asynchronous Scheduling FMNIST [192]
N/S(Not Specified) by the authors
algorithm that makes use of UA Vs as local model aggregators
through UA V-to-UA V communications and reduces the energy
consumption of DFL using Radio Resource Management
(RRM) under the constraints of over-the-air learning latency.
In maritime environments, optimizing transportation focusing
on certain performance metrics may lead to non-convex
problems due to the large number and heterogeneity of
network nodes and vessels. To tackle this issue, Giannopoulos
et al. [215] presented and analyzed various use cases in
these scenarios and demonstrated the superiority of DFL over
traditional ML approaches using datasets from an enterprise
specializing in the maritime industry.
E. Vehicles
In recent years, concerns regarding road safety have
significantly increased, prompting significant efforts towards
developing automated solutions to detect distractions while
driving and to alert vehicles on the road intelligently [218].
In this sense, decentralized solutions and FL have emerged as
promising approaches in this sector, as illustrated by the latest
vehicle solutions highlighted in Table IX.
The unique characteristics of Vehicle-to-Everything (V2X)
communication, including the high mobility of vehicles
and limited storage capacity of nodes, present particular
communication and processing challenges that can be
addressed through DFL. Building on recent advances in ML,
Yu et al. [20] proposed a proactive caching scheme based on
SDFL and P2P communications. In this solution, a vehicle
acts as a parameter server to aggregate the updated global
model from peers instead of an edge node. Experimental
results show that the solution outperforms typical baselines,
gaining efficiency and autonomy. Furthermore, Blockchain
supports data integrity when transmitting model parameters,
thus addressing privacy concerns when sharing private data
between vehicles. This mechanism has been utilized in several
studies, such as [219] and [220]. While the former used deep
Reinforcement Learning (RL) to select the participating nodes
of DFL, thereby improving the efficiency of the data-sharing
process, the latter minimized the system delay by exploiting
the channel dynamics.
Finally, other studies consider new ways to optimize
resources to present a solution comparable to server-based
architectures. Chen et al. [22] proposed a novel approach
to DFL based on a P2P network designed to be resilient to
byzantine faults. The authors evaluated their method on the
MNIST and KITTI datasets, assessing the performance of the
proposed P2P approach in terms of accuracy, convergence
speed, and fault tolerance and comparing it to traditional
server-based methods. Similarly, Barbieriet al. [3] investigated
the use of DFL methods to improve the classification of
road users (such as pedestrians, cyclists, and vehicles) and
objects based on Lidar data. The authors simulated a realistic
V2X network using the collective perception service to
share PointNet model parameters. The results showed a
low latency training compared to existing distributed ML
approaches. Another study that investigated the use of DFL
in vehicular networks is presented in [223]. In this work, the
authors focused on ensuring the Quality of Service (QoS) for
communication between vehicles and remote drivers in remote
driving scenarios. Specifically, they proposed using Predictive
Quality of Service (PQoS) to predict and react to unanticipated
degradation of the QoS. To implement PQoS in vehicular
networks, the authors designed an RL agent to identify the
optimal compression level for sending automotive data under
low latency and reliability constraints. Finally, Hu et al. [224]
integrated Blockchain into a fully connected vehicle topology.
The authors demonstrated robust privacy protection and system
reliability without significant latency, ensuring efficient and
accurate data exchange, even with data of varying quality.
VI. T RENDS , LESSONS LEARNED , AND OPEN
CHALLENGES
Based on the different aspects of DFL analyzed through
research questions Q1-Q3, and following the storyline
presented in Fig. 2, this section responds to “ Q4. What
trends, lessons learned, and challenges have emerged in
DFL?” To provide a clear structure, each trend, lesson, and
challenge is related to a specific category, such as [Fund.]
for fundamentals, [Fram.] for frameworks, and [Sce.] for
application scenarios.
A. Current Trends
The main trends in current work, based on the evolution of
recent solutions, are as follows (see Fig. 9).
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 24
DFL Fundamentals
Publications
HEALTHCARE
INDUSTRY 4.0
MOBILE SERVICES
MILITARY
VEHICLES
Federation
​
Architecture
Network
​
Topology
Communication
​
Mechanisms
Security and
​
Privacy
Key Performance
​
Indicators
DFL
​
Optimization
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
(a) Fundamentals per application scenario.
HEALTHCARE
 
HEALTHCARE
INDUSTRY 4.0
 
INDUSTRY 4.0
MOBILE
 
SERVICES
 
MOBILE
 
SERVICES
MILITARY
 
MILITARY
VEHICLES
 
VEHICLES
Data
 
privacy
 
20%
 
Data
 
privacy
 
20%
Disease
 
detection
 
7%
 
Disease
 
detection
 
7%
Anomaly
 
detection
 
11%
 
Anomaly
 
detection
 
11%
Secure
 
suply chain
 
6%
 
Secure
 
suply chain
 
6%
Factory
 
process
 
4%
 
Factory
 
process
 
4%
Edge-computing
 
13%
 
Edge-computing
 13%
Blockchain
 
7%
 
Blockchain
 
7%
Personalized
 
learning
 
3%
 
Personalized
 
learning
 
3%
UAVs
 
12%
 
UAVs
 
12%
Ad-hoc
 
communications
 
7%
 
Ad-hoc
 
communications
 
7%
Vehicle
 
communications
 
7%
 
Vehicle
 
communications
 
7%
Efficient
 
sharing
 
3%
 
Efficient
 
sharing
 
3% (b) Main objectives per application scenario.
Fig. 9: Distribution of DFL publications.
[Fund.] Federation architectures, network topologies,
and communication mechanisms are extensively studied .
Most works analyze the communications between network
nodes, the network topologies (mostly fully connected), and
the architecture it supports, with DFL being the main approach
addressed. Fig. 9a shows the trend of the above fundamentals
in different application scenarios.
[Fund.] Fully connected network topologies are widely
applied to DFL scenarios . Network topologies where all
nodes are connected to each other are the most commonly
used in DFL. Its versatility and simplicity of construction
have made it a usable approach in most application scenarios.
Table II shows how about 50% of the papers analyzed in the
network topology fundamental belong to this approach.
[Fund.] The optimization of communications is
predominant in recent work on DFL . The inherent
functionality of DFL requires communication optimization
techniques between federation participants. In this sense,
Table II shows how more than 65% of the analyzed solutions
address complexity reduction in model parameter exchanges.
The healthcare and mobile services are the most optimized
application scenarios in terms of communications (see Fig. 9a).
[Fram.] Most of the frameworks are adapted to cross-
device environments. The reviewed frameworks offer DFL for
deploying simulated or real federated scenarios with limited
devices (see Table IV). They also typically provide models fed
by images or timelines, aggregation algorithms, and various
communication technologies between participants.
[Sce.] DFL is widely used in healthcare scenarios . DFL
meets its goals in healthcare data analytics, with a significant
impact on the accuracy of medicine and, ultimately, improved
treatment and diagnosis (see Fig. 9b). Electronic medical
records, medical imaging, disease detection, and collaborative
drug discovery are the most significant use cases for DFL.
[Sce.] DFL gains momentum in mobile services and
Industry 4.0 . The high performance offered by DFL has
led to the increasing relevance of both application scenarios.
In mobile services, DFL improves personalization and
recommendation systems in edge devices while protecting user
privacy. In Industry 4.0, DFL enables collaboration between
multiple organizations without sharing sensitive data, reducing
costs, and improving efficiency.
[Sce.] Anomaly detection and deployment on UA Vs are
prominent trends . Fig. 9b shows how both topics maintain
remarkable applicability in different application scenarios.
Specifically, anomaly detection represents the 11% of works
documented in industrial scenarios, while the use of UA Vs
represents the 12% of works in military scenarios.
B. Lessons Learned
After reviewing and analyzing the state of the art, the
following lessons have been learned:
[Fund.] The use of specific aggregation algorithms for
DFL is still limited . Although FedAvg is widely used in
existing frameworks, applications in certain DFL scenarios
need to obtain similar results. Studies of different application
scenarios (see Table V, VI, VII, VIII, and IX) have opted for
customizations of the algorithm to adapt it to the peculiarities
of the federation models.
[Fund.] Limited analysis of improving decentralized
systems with DFL . Decentralized systems face challenges
such as consistency and coordination between nodes. In
the literature, there are not enough studies comparing and
evaluating DFL enhancement in these systems. There is a need
to determine the resilience, robustness, and overall security
provided by this approach that reduces dependency on a server.
[Fram.] There is a limited number of solutions providing
realistic federation benchmarks. As more DFL architectures
are developed, it is important to have a benchmark with
representative datasets and workloads to evaluate existing
systems and direct future development. Although many DFL
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 25
frameworks provide benchmarks (see Table IV), no single
benchmark has been widely used in all studies reviewed. In
addition, existing benchmarks often ignore metrics such as
system efficiency, reliability, or architecture robustness. The
evaluation of model performance on non-IID datasets and
system security needs further research.
[Fram.] There is no consensus on frameworks in the
literature for deploying DFL architectures. The frameworks
analyzed in Table IV show heterogeneous characteristics,
mostly adapted to validation scenarios. Therefore, there are
limited open-source DFL frameworks with sufficient maturity
to be network, node, and data agnostic.
[Sce.] The military and vehicular scenarios are complex
application scenarios for deploying DFL solutions . The
solutions presented in the military (see Table VIII) and
vehicles scenarios (see Table IX) lack the robustness to be put
into practice, so they usually recreate simulated deployments
to adapt nodes and models. In addition, they present limited
bandwidth, unstable network connections, and high-security
requirements in simulations. Therefore, strategies such as edge
computing, hybrid approaches, and Blockchain technology are
used to reduce complexity.
[Sce.] There is a lack of literature using unsupervised
learning in DFL architectures . The literature has not
addressed the applicability of unsupervised learning in DFL-
based scenarios where federation participants do not operate
locally labeled data. Table VI, VII, VIII, and IX indicate
that the literature only defines solutions using supervised ML
models such as MLP or CNN for classification tasks.
C. Open Challenges
Based on the current state of the art, the following points
represent the main challenges that future DFL solutions might
consider. In addition, Table X summarizes the open challenges
and their future developments, indicating the importance of
their application in the future.
[Fund.] Improve the scalability of the solution when
the number of participants in the federation increases .
The development of algorithms that can dynamically
select participants based on their availability, network
connection, and trustworthiness would help to ensure that the
federation remains resilient to dropouts and the unavailability
of participants. In addition, exploring new techniques
for compressing and aggregating models across multiple
participants can reduce communication and computation
overhead, particularly for large-scale federations. Finally,
including personalized local model learning can improve
training while minimizing the impact of low network
dependability and client availability.
[Fund.] Improve the cybersecurity mechanisms
depending on the participant and the application
scenario. The security of the nodes participating in DFL
and their ability to detect and prevent attacks or threats
in heterogeneous scenarios are crucial to the success of
this approach. A promising solution would be to design an
architecture that treats participants differently according to
their privacy restrictions, allowing for a more personalized and
Table X: Open challenges in DFL and future developments.
Challenge Future Developments
Fundamentals[Fund.]
Scalability of DFL with increasing
participants (!!!)
•Dynamic participant selection
•Personalized local model learning
Cybersecurity mechanisms for a secure
DFL (!!!)
•Detect attacks in DFL scenarios
•Different treatment based on privacy
Trustworthiness among federation
participants (!!!)
•Maintain trust policies
•Prevent dishonest behavior
Homogeneous node participation (!!) •Quantization and gradient compression
•Use of SDFL
Address participant mobility in DFL
scenarios (!!)
•Topology-aware node reconfiguration
•Resilient synchronization methods
Study of adversarial attacks (!!) •Identify the techniques and their impacts
•Compare against traditional approaches
Explore the use of Reinforcement
Learning (!!)
•Optimize the federated model performance
•Improve the selection of participants
DFL standardization efforts (!!) •Promote comprehensive DFL standards
•Involve standard-setting bodies (ISO, IEEE)
5G and 6G technologies for
communications (!)
•Network slicing utilization
•5G/6G-integrated edge computing
Frameworks[Fram.]
Modular, scalable, and efficient
frameworks (!!!)
•Implement and manage DFL fundamentals
•Application in practical scenarios
Heterogeneous datasets in decentralized
participants (!!)
•Data preprocessing and normalization
•Advanced data augmentation techniques
Dynamic scheduling of federated
network (!)
•Adaptable federation architecture
•Resilient algorithms
Application scenarios[Sce.]
Exploration of new DFL application
scenarios (!!)
•Evaluate DFL in smart city technologies
•Combine AI, IoT, and DFL for testing tools
! low importance,!! high importance,!!!critical
secure approach. This is particularly relevant for application
scenarios such as social media applications, industrial IoT,
and Blockchain, where user privacy protection is critical.
[Fund.] Enhance trustworthiness among federation
participants in DFL approaches . To ensure the accuracy
and reliability of the federated model, participating nodes
must establish trust policies with one another. These policies
allow participants to aggregate model parameters based on
reputation and performance history only from those they trust.
By doing so, participants can avoid dishonest behavior and
maintain the integrity of the FL process, thereby encouraging
the participation of other nodes in the network.
[Fund.] Ensure the homogeneous participation of the
constrained nodes in the federation . It is challenging to
guarantee the participation of nodes with limited autonomy
or bandwidth. Some solutions could use quantization methods
and gradient compression techniques to reduce communication
overhead. Another option is to consider other federation
architectures, such as SDFL, where nodes with limited
resources can participate in the federation while still
maintaining some level of centralization.
[Fund.] Address participant mobility. The dynamic nature
of DFL, where participants may join or leave the federation
at any time, poses challenges in maintaining learning stability
and reliability. Future DFL solutions need to manage mobility
and develop strategies to handle the continuous flow of
participants while ensuring efficient learning.
[Fund.] In-depth study of adversarial attacks applied
in DFL approaches . The literature on cyberattacks
affecting DFL is limited, with relatively little attention
given to adversarial attacks and their impact on DFL
performance. Thus, evaluating their impact compared to other
traditional approaches, such as CFL, can help understand the
vulnerabilities of DFL better and inform the development of
more robust security measures.
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 26
[Fund.] Explore the use of RL . The literature regarding
RL applied in decentralized collaborative scenarios is scarce.
This learning approach can optimize the performance of
the federated model by dynamically allocating resources and
adjusting the learning process. Additionally, it can be used to
optimize the selection of participants in the federation, as well
as to dynamically adjust the communication and aggregation
parameters based on the performance of the participants.
[Fund.] Research the use of 5G/6G networks to
improve DFL communications . The rise of 5G and
subsequent 6G networks presents a significant potential to
enhance communications performance by providing faster
and more reliable communication between nodes. Thus,
exploring techniques for efficient data aggregation and
transmission is necessary using ultra-low latency and high
bandwidth capabilities. Moreover, researchers could examine
the possibility of utilizing network slicing to allocate dedicated
resources for DFL tasks and integrate edge computing
within these networks. Furthermore, with 5G/6G-powered
DFL, a deep focus on the security and integrity of P2P
communications between edge devices becomes critical. Given
the potential vulnerability of these networks to novel security
threats, dedicated research on defense mechanisms is essential
to safeguard secure and trusted P2P exchanges. To this end, it
is necessary to deploy appropriate defense mechanisms, such
as encryption, SMPC, or Blockchain technologies.
[Fram.] Create modular, scalable, and efficient
frameworks for diverse application scenarios. The literature
has not addressed an agnostic federation for different solutions
in terms of DFL fundamentals. Therefore, it is necessary to
design and implement a robust and reliable solution to generate
realistic scenarios, considering elements such as model
creation, data storage, framework usage, model parameter
exchange, and model aggregation. The framework should
focus on efficiency, considering communication overhead,
computational resources, and storage requirements.
[Fram.] Handle heterogeneous datasets in decentralized
participants. Participants may possess varying sizes,
distributions, and quality data, impacting the model
performance. Addressing the challenge of dividing or
adapting datasets to account for these differences is crucial to
achieving optimal performance in DFL scenarios. It involves
creating methods for data preprocessing, normalization, and
augmentation that can accommodate the distinct characteristics
and variations inherent in the datasets of each participating
node.
[Fram.] Adapt the dynamic scheduling of the federated
network to the application scenario . Due to the instability
of the application scenario, the number of participants may
not be fixed during the learning process in DFL. Therefore,
it is necessary to develop algorithms that can dynamically
adjust the number of participants in the federation based on
changes in inputs or outputs from the nodes. This would
require building resilient algorithms that handle low network
dependability and client availability. In addition, exploring the
use of adaptive FL techniques that can adjust the level of
centralization or decentralization in response to changes in the
application scenario could be beneficial.
[Sce.] Explore new DFL application scenarios . DFL can
be effectively applied in a multitude of application scenarios.
For instance, DFL can help to increase the intelligence of
robotic and autonomous systems, making them more efficient
and reliable. In smart city technologies, DFL can exchange
local model parameters between devices, enhancing overall
performance. Additionally, DFL can be evaluated using Digital
Twin (DT) technology, combining AI, IoT, and DFL to create
a simulated environment where tools can be tested in real time
without exposing people or facilities to unknown risks.
[Fund.] Explore standardization activities for DFL .
It is necessary to have comprehensive standards to ensure
uniformity, interoperability, and trustworthiness across various
implementations. These standards should address key elements
like privacy-preserving methods, security features, data
quality standards, model training processes, and performance
indicators. Standardizing DFL could encourage consistency in
research outcomes and establish a universal framework for
assessing DFL methodologies.
VII. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work studies the evolution of DFL in recent years,
providing the basic and distinctive fundamentals versus
traditional federated architectures, its current application
scenarios, and the frameworks that manage the deployment
of DFL architectures. In this context, the present work has
answered the following research questions.
Q1. What are the fundamental aspects of DFL? Section III
studies the main aspects of DFL in the most current and
representative works in the literature, clarifying the differences
with CFL. The analysis provides a set of fundamentals
related to federation architectures, network topologies,
communication mechanisms, and security techniques. It also
proposes KPIs to evaluate the approach and mechanisms to
optimize DFL. With all this, the work proposes the first
taxonomy that defines and details the fundamentals of DFL.
Q2. What DFL frameworks exist, and what fundamentals
do they provide? Section IV discusses the main frameworks
currently used to deploy DFL scenarios. This section shows the
most mature frameworks in FL versus the incipient solutions
that favor the inclusion of DFL. Thus, this paper highlights
the prominence of current solutions and the DFL fundamentals
contemplated to generate robust solutions to the scenario.
Q3. Which are the main characteristics of the most
relevant scenarios of DFL? Section V describes, analyzes, and
compares the most relevant and recent solutions according
to their application scenario. The predominant application
scenarios are healthcare, mobile services, and Industry 4.0.
Also, this work determines that fields such as military or
vehicles have grown significantly in recent years. Regarding
fundamentals, decentralized cross-device architectures in fully
connected network topologies are predominant. Optimization
mechanisms are applied to the above aspects, mainly to
communications and aggregation algorithms.
Q4. What trends, lessons learned, and challenges have
emerged in DFL? Lessons learned, current trends, and
future challenges have been documented in Section VI.
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 27
It details how to create more sophisticated federation
architectures, topologies, optimizations, and their applicability
in different scenarios. At the same time, certain limitations
in the recent literature are also detailed. For instance, the
scarce comparison between DFL scenarios or the lack of
frameworks allowing their deployment. In addition, handling
heterogeneous datasets, cyberattacks, or using 5G/6G in
communications have not yet been robustly applied, opening
avenues for future research.
As future work, it is planned to design and implement
scalable solutions capable of generating heterogeneous
scenarios. To achieve this, it is necessary to create solutions
using agnostic data types employing performance data from
the devices acting as nodes. These solutions will be integrated
with ML/DL techniques, communication optimization, and
data aggregation techniques that preserve security and
privacy while guaranteeing network and node performance
capabilities. Furthermore, these solutions must offer a range of
configurable options based on various federation architectures,
including CFL, DFL, or SDFL, as well as decentralized
technologies such as Blockchain. Finally, it is considered
to define and build sets of metrics to complement the
functionality of the solution and the evaluation of the system.
REFERENCES
[1] H. Liu and W. Wu, “Federated reinforcement learning for decentralized
voltage control in distribution networks,” IEEE Transactions on Smart
Grid, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 3840–3843, 2022.
[2] Z. Lian et al. , “DEEP-FEL: Decentralized, efficient and privacy-
enhanced federated edge learning for healthcare cyber physical
systems,” IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering ,
vol. 9, no. 5, pp. 3558–3569, 2022.
[3] L. Barbieri, S. Savazzi, M. Brambilla, and M. Nicoli, “Decentralized
federated learning for extended sensing in 6G connected vehicles,”
Vehicular Communications, vol. 33, p. 100396, 2022.
[4] H. B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y.
Arcas, “Communication-efficient learning of deep networks from
decentralized data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.05629 , 2016.
[5] L. He, A. Bian, and M. Jaggi, “COLA: Decentralized Linear Learning,”
in 32nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing
Systems, ser. NIPS’18. Curran Associates Inc., 2018, p. 4541–4551.
[6] A. Hard, K. Partridge, R. Mathews, and S. Augenstein, “Jointly
learning from decentralized (federated) and centralized data to mitigate
distribution shift,” inProceedings of NeurIPS Workshop on Distribution
Shifts, 2021.
[7] T. Wang, Y . Liu, X. Zheng, H.-N. Dai, W. Jia, and M. Xie, “Edge-based
communication optimization for distributed federated learning,” IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering , pp. 1–1, 2021.
[8] S. Savazzi, M. Nicoli, M. Bennis, S. Kianoush, and L. Barbieri,
“Opportunities of federated learning in connected, cooperative, and
automated industrial systems,” IEEE Communications Magazine ,
vol. 59, no. 2, pp. 16–21, 2021.
[9] A. Bellet, A.-M. Kermarrec, and E. Lavoie, “D-Cliques: Compensating
for data heterogeneity with topology in decentralized federated
learning,” in 41st International Symposium on Reliable Distributed
Systems proceedings , 2022, p. 11. [Online]. Available: http:
//infoscience.epfl.ch/record/294834
[10] E. Georgatos, C. Mavrokefalidis, and K. Berberidis, “Efficient fully
distributed federated learning with adaptive local links,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.12281, 2022.
[11] K. Bonawitz et al. , “Towards federated learning at scale: System
design,” in Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems ,
A. Talwalkar, V . Smith, and M. Zaharia, Eds., vol. 1, 2019, pp. 374–
388.
[12] Y . Qu, C. Xu, L. Gao, Y . Xiang, and S. Yu, “FL-SEC: Privacy-
preserving decentralized federated learning using SignSGD for the
Internet of Artificially Intelligent Things,” IEEE Internet of Things
Magazine, vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 85–90, 2022.
[13] Z. Zhao, J. Xia, L. Fan, X. Lei, G. K. Karagiannidis, and
A. Nallanathan, “System optimization of federated learning net-
works with a constrained latency,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. 71, no. 1, pp. 1095–1100, 2022.
[14] B. Wang, J. Fang, H. Li, X. Yuan, and Q. Ling, “Confederated learning:
Federated learning with decentralized edge servers,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.14905, 2022.
[15] EPFL - Machine Learning and Optimization Laboratory, “DISCO -
Distributed Collaborative Machine Learning,” GitHub, 2022. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/epfml/disco
[16] T. V . Nguyen et al., “A novel decentralized federated learning approach
to train on globally distributed, poor quality, and protected private
medical data,” Scientific Reports, vol. 12, no. 1, p. 8888, 2022.
[17] J. Kang et al. , “Blockchain-based federated learning for industrial
metaverses: Incentive scheme with optimal AoI,” in IEEE International
Conference on Blockchain (Blockchain) . IEEE Computer Society,
2022, pp. 71–78.
[18] L. Wang, Y . Xu, H. Xu, M. Chen, and L. Huang, “Accelerating
decentralized federated learning in heterogeneous edge computing,”
IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , pp. 1–1, 2022.
[19] Y . Wang, Z. Su, N. Zhang, and A. Benslimane, “Learning in the
air: Secure federated learning for uav-assisted crowdsensing,” IEEE
Transactions on Network Science and Engineering , vol. 8, no. 2, pp.
1055–1069, 2021.
[20] Z. Yu, J. Hu, G. Min, H. Xu, and J. Mills, “Proactive content caching
for internet-of-vehicles based on peer-to-peer federated learning,”
in IEEE 26th International Conference on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, 2020, pp. 601–608.
[21] Z. Wang, Y . Hu, S. Yan, Z. Wang, R. Hou, and C. Wu, “Efficient ring-
topology decentralized federated learning with deep generative models
for medical data in ehealthcare systems,” Electronics, vol. 11, no. 10,
2022.
[22] J.-H. Chen, M.-R. Chen, G.-Q. Zeng, and J.-S. Weng, “BDFL: A
byzantine-fault-tolerance decentralized federated learning method for
autonomous vehicle,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology ,
vol. 70, no. 9, pp. 8639–8652, 2021.
[23] W. Y . B. Lim et al. , “Federated learning in mobile edge networks:
A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
vol. 22, no. 3, pp. 2031–2063, 2020.
[24] D. C. Nguyen, M. Ding, P. N. Pathirana, A. Seneviratne, J. Li, and H. V .
Poor, “Federated learning for Internet of Things: A comprehensive
survey,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 1622–1658, 2021.
[25] L. U. Khan, W. Saad, Z. Han, E. Hossain, and C. S. Hong, “Federated
learning for Internet of Things: Recent advances, taxonomy, and open
challenges,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials, vol. 23, no. 3,
pp. 1759–1799, 2021.
[26] V . Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, Y . Huang, A. Dehghantanha,
and G. Srivastava, “A survey on security and privacy of federated
learning,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 115, pp. 619–
640, 2021.
[27] P. Boobalan et al., “Fusion of federated learning and industrial Internet
of Things: A survey,” Computer Networks, vol. 212, p. 109048, 2022.
[28] M. Joshi, A. Pal, and M. Sankarasubbu, “Federated learning for
healthcare domain - pipeline, applications and challenges,” ACM Trans.
Comput. Healthcare, 2022.
[29] L. Witt, M. Heyer, K. Toyoda, W. Samek, and D. Li, “Decentral
and incentivized federated learning frameworks: A systematic literature
review,”arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.07855 , 2022.
[30] Y . Qu, M. P. Uddin, C. Gan, Y . Xiang, L. Gao, and J. Yearwood,
“Blockchain-enabled federated learning: A survey,” ACM Comput.
Surv., 2022.
[31] M. Billah, S. T. Mehedi, A. Anwar, Z. Rahman, and R. Islam, “A
systematic literature review on blockchain enabled federated learning
framework for Internet of Vehicles,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2203.05192,
2022.
[32] R. Gupta and T. Alam, “Survey on federated-learning approaches in
distributed environment,” Wireless Personal Communications, 2022.
[33] D. Saraswat et al. , “Blockchain-based federated learning in UA Vs
beyond 5G networks: A solution taxonomy and future directions,”IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 33 154–33 182, 2022.
[34] J. Wu, S. Drew, F. Dong, Z. Zhu, and J. Zhou, “Topology-aware
federated learning in edge computing: A comprehensive survey,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.02573, 2023.
[35] H. Chen, H. Wang, D. Jin, and Y . Li, “Advancements in
federated learning: Models, methods, and privacy,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.11466, 2023.
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 28
[36] L. Witt, M. Heyer, K. Toyoda, W. Samek, and D. Li, “Decentral and
incentivized federated learning frameworks: A systematic literature
review,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3642–
3663, 2023.
[37] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, A. Talwalkar, and V . Smith, “Federated learning:
Challenges, methods, and future directions,” IEEE Signal Processing
Magazine, vol. 37, no. 3, pp. 50–60, 2020.
[38] R. Dai, L. Shen, F. He, X. Tian, and D. Tao, “DisPFL:
Towards communication-efficient personalized federated learning via
decentralized sparse training,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.00187, 2022.
[39] O. Marfoq, C. Xu, G. Neglia, and R. Vidal, “Throughput-optimal
topology design for cross-silo federated learning,” in 34th International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , ser. NIPS’20.
Curran Associates Inc., 2020.
[40] J. Han, Y . Han, G. Huang, and Y . Ma, “DeFL: Decentralized
weight aggregation for cross-silo federated learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2208.00848, 2022.
[41] S. P. Karimireddy et al. , “Breaking the centralized barrier for
cross-device federated learning,” in Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, M. Ranzato, A. Beygelzimer, Y . Dauphin, P. Liang,
and J. W. Vaughan, Eds., vol. 34. Curran Associates, Inc., 2021, pp.
28 663–28 676.
[42] C. Feng, B. Liu, K. Yu, S. K. Goudos, and S. Wan, “Blockchain-
empowered decentralized horizontal federated learning for 5G-enabled
UA Vs,”IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics , vol. 18, no. 5,
pp. 3582–3592, 2022.
[43] M. Wilt, J. K. Matelsky, and A. S. Gearhart, “Scatterbrained: A flexible
and expandable pattern for decentralized machine learning,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2112.07718, 2021.
[44] S. Kalra, J. Wen, J. C. Cresswell, M. V olkovs, and H. R. Tizhoosh,
“ProxyFL: Decentralized federated learning through proxy model
sharing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2111.11343 , 2021.
[45] R. Kanagavelu et al. , “Ce-fed: Communication efficient multi-party
computation enabled federated learning,” Array, vol. 15, p. 100207,
2022.
[46] R. Xu and Y . Chen, “ µDFL: A secure microchained decentralized
federated learning fabric atop IoT networks,” IEEE Transactions on
Network and Service Management, vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 2677–2688, 2022.
[47] M. Yemini, R. Saha, E. Ozfatura, D. Gündüz, and A. J. Goldsmith,
“Semi-decentralized federated learning with collaborative relaying,” in
IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory, 2022, pp. 1471–
1476.
[48] F. P.-C. Lin, S. Hosseinalipour, S. S. Azam, C. G. Brinton, and
N. Michelusi, “Semi-decentralized federated learning with cooperative
D2D local model aggregations,” IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 3851–3869, 2021.
[49] P. M. Sánchez Sánchez et al. , “Analyzing the Robustness of
Decentralized Horizontal and Vertical Federated Learning Architectures
in a Non-IID Scenario,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.11061 , 2022.
[50] C. Li, G. Li, and P. K. Varshney, “Decentralized federated learning via
mutual knowledge transfer,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 9,
no. 2, pp. 1136–1147, 2022.
[51] Y . Xiao et al., “Fully decentralized federated learning-based on-board
mission for uav swarm system,”IEEE Communications Letters, vol. 25,
no. 10, pp. 3296–3300, 2021.
[52] T. Ma, H. Wang, and C. Li, “Quantized distributed federated learning
for industrial internet of things,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal ,
vol. 10, no. 4, pp. 3027–3036, 2023.
[53] Y .-T. Chow, W. Shi, T. Wu, and W. Yin, “Expander graph and
communication-efficient decentralized optimization,” in 50th Asilomar
Conference on Signals, Systems and Computers , 2016, pp. 1715–1720.
[54] Y . Hua, K. Miller, A. L. Bertozzi, C. Qian, and B. Wang, “Efficient and
reliable overlay networks for decentralized federated learning,” SIAM
Journal on Applied Mathematics , vol. 82, no. 4, pp. 1558–1586, 2022.
[55] T. V ogels, H. Hendrikx, and M. Jaggi, “Beyond spectral gap:
The role of the topology in decentralized learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2206.03093, 2022.
[56] K. Cheng et al. , “Secureboost: A lossless federated learning
framework,” IEEE Intelligent Systems , vol. 36, pp. 87–98, 2021.
[57] C. Briggs, Z. Fan, and P. Andras, “Federated learning with hierarchical
clustering of local updates to improve training on non-iid data,” in
International Joint Conference on Neural Networks , 2020, pp. 1–9.
[58] M. S. Al-Abiad, M. Obeed, M. J. Hossain, and A. Chaaban,
“Decentralized aggregation for energy-efficient federated learning via
d2d communications,” IEEE Transactions on Communications, vol. 71,
no. 6, pp. 3333–3351, 2023.
[59] P. Pinyoanuntapong, W. H. Huff, M. Lee, C. Chen, and P. Wang,
“Toward scalable and robust AIoT via decentralized federated
learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Magazine , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 30–
35, 2022.
[60] S. Zehtabi, S. Hosseinalipour, and C. G. Brinton, “Decentralized
event-triggered federated learning with heterogeneous communication
thresholds,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03726 , 2022.
[61] J. Cao, Z. Lian, W. Liu, Z. Zhu, and C. Ji, “HADFL: Heterogeneity-
aware decentralized federated learning framework,” in 58th ACM/IEEE
Design Automation Conference (DAC) , 2021, p. 1–6.
[62] Z. Chen, W. Liao, P. Tian, Q. Wang , and W. Yu, “A fairness-aware
peer-to-peer decentralized learning framework with heterogeneous
devices,” Future Internet, vol. 14, no. 5, 2022.
[63] Y . Zhou, Q. Chen, Z. Wang, D. Xiao, and J. Chen, “Communication-
efficient cluster federated learning in large-scale peer-to-peer net-
works,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.03843 , 2022.
[64] X. Wang, A. Lalitha, T. Javidi, and F. Koushanfar, “Peer-to-peer
variational federated learning over arbitrary graphs,” IEEE Journal on
Selected Areas in Information Theory , pp. 1–1, 2022.
[65] Y . Shi, Y . Zhou, and Y . Shi, “Over-the-air decentralized federated
learning,” in IEEE International Symposium on Information Theory ,
2021, pp. 455–460.
[66] Z. Li et al. , “Mining latent relationships among clients: Peer-to-peer
federated learning with adaptive neighbor matching,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.12285, 2022.
[67] T. Wink and Z. Nochta, “An approach for peer-to-peer federated
learning,” in 51st Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on
Dependable Systems and Networks Workshops , 2021, pp. 150–157.
[68] M. Qi, Z. Wang, S. Chen, and Y . Xiang, “A hybrid incentive mechanism
for decentralized federated learning,” Distrib. Ledger Technol., 2022.
[69] I. Hegedus, G. Danner, and M. Jelasity, “Decentralized learning works:
An empirical comparison of gossip learning and federated learning,”
Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, vol. 148, pp. 109–124,
2021.
[70] Z. Tang, S. Shi, B. Li, and X. Chu, “Gossipfl: A decentralized federated
learning framework with sparsified and adaptive communication,”IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , vol. 34, no. 3, pp.
909–922, 2023.
[71] J. Jiang, L. Hu, C. Hu, J. Liu, and Z. Wang, “BACombo: Bandwidth-
aware decentralized federated learning,”Electronics, vol. 9, no. 3, 2020.
[72] Y . Belal, A. Bellet, S. B. Mokhtar, and V . Nitu, “PEPPER: Empowering
user-centric recommender systems over gossip learning,” Proc. ACM
Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol. , vol. 6, no. 3, 2022.
[73] M. Khelghatdoust and M. Mahdavi, “A socially-aware, privacy-
preserving, and scalable federated learning protocol for distributed
online social networks,” in Advanced Information Networking and
Applications. Springer International Publishing, 2022, pp. 192–203.
[74] A. Koloskova, S. U. Stich, and M. Jaggi, “Decentralized stochastic
optimization and gossip algorithms with compressed communication,”
in 36th International Conference on Machine Learning , vol. 97.
PMLR, 2019, pp. 3479–3487.
[75] J. Yin, X. Cui, and K. Li, “A reputation-based resilient and recoverable
P2P botnet,” inIEEE Second International Conference on Data Science
in Cyberspace (DSC) , 2017, pp. 275–282.
[76] R. S. Rawat, M. Diwakar, and P. Verma, “Zeroaccess botnet
investigation and analysis,” International Journal of Information
Technology, vol. 13, no. 5, pp. 2091–2099, 2021.
[77] Y . Chen, F. Luo, T. Li, T. Xiang, Z. Liu, and J. Li, “A training-integrity
privacy-preserving federated learning scheme with trusted execution
environment,” Information Sciences, vol. 522, pp. 69–79, 2020.
[78] B. Alangot, D. Reijsbergen, S. Venugopalan, P. Szalachowski, and K. S.
Yeo, “Decentralized and lightweight approach to detect eclipse attacks
on proof of work blockchains,” IEEE Transactions on Network and
Service Management, vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1659–1672, 2021.
[79] B. Niu, Y . Chen, Z. Wang, F. Li, B. Wang, and H. Li, “Eclipse:
Preserving differential location privacy against long-term observation
attacks,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing , vol. 21, no. 1, pp.
125–138, 2022.
[80] J. Verbraeken, M. de V os, and J. Pouwelse, “Bristle: Decentralized
federated learning in byzantine, non-i.i.d. environments,”arXiv preprint
arXiv:2110.11006, 2021.
[81] G. Lu, Z. Xiong, R. Li, and W. Li, “Decentralized federated learning:
A defense against gradient inversion attack,” in Wireless Internet, 2023,
pp. 44–56.
[82] S. Chen, D. Yu, Y . Zou, J. Yu, and X. Cheng, “Decentralized wireless
federated learning with differential privacy,” IEEE Transactions on
Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 9, pp. 6273–6282, 2022.
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 29
[83] E. T. Martínez Beltrán et al., “Mitigating Communications Threats in
Decentralized Federated Learning through Moving Target Defense,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.11730 , 2023.
[84] Á. L. Perales Gómez, E. T. Martínez Beltrán, P. M. Sánchez Sánchez,
and A. Huertas Celdrán, “TemporalFED: Detecting Cyberattacks in
Industrial Time-Series Data Using Decentralized Federated Learning,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.03554 , 2023.
[85] R. C. Geyer, T. Klein, and M. Nabi, “Differentially private federated
learning: A client level perspective,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1712.07557,
2017.
[86] B. Verhaelen, F. Mayer, S. Peukert, and G. Lanza, “A comprehensive
KPI network for the performance measurement and management in
global production networks,” Production Engineering, vol. 15, no. 5,
pp. 635–650, 2021.
[87] Y . Qu et al., “Decentralized privacy using blockchain-enabled federated
learning in fog computing,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 7,
no. 6, pp. 5171–5183, 2020.
[88] G. Nadiradze, A. Sabour, P. Davies, S. Li, and D. Alistarh,
“Asynchronous decentralized sgd with quantized and local updates,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 34, pp. 6829–
6842, 2021.
[89] H. Ye, L. Liang, and G. Y . Li, “Decentralized federated learning with
unreliable communications,” IEEE Journal of Selected Topics in Signal
Processing, vol. 16, no. 3, pp. 487–500, 2022.
[90] T.-T. Kuo and A. Pham, “Detecting model misconducts in decentralized
healthcare federated learning,” International Journal of Medical
Informatics, vol. 158, p. 104658, 2022.
[91] P. Vanhaesebrouck, A. Bellet, and M. Tommasi, “Decentralized
collaborative learning of personalized models over networks,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1610.05202, 2016.
[92] A. Gholami, N. Torkzaban, and J. S. Baras, “Trusted decentralized
federated learning,” in IEEE 19th Annual Consumer Communications
& Networking Conference , 2022, pp. 1–6.
[93] V . Mothukuri, R. M. Parizi, S. Pouriyeh, A. Dehghantanha, and K.-
K. R. Choo, “FabricFL: Blockchain-in-the-loop federated learning for
trusted decentralized systems,” IEEE Systems Journal , vol. 16, no. 3,
pp. 3711–3722, 2022.
[94] J. Kone ˇcný, H. B. McMahan, F. X. Yu, P. Richtarik, A. T.
Suresh, and D. Bacon, “Federated Learning: Strategies for improving
communication efficiency,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1610.05492 , 2016.
[95] P. M. Sánchez Sánchez, A. Huertas Celdrán, N. Xie, G. Bovet,
G. Martínez Pérez, and B. Stiller, “Federatedtrust: A solution for
trustworthy federated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.09844 ,
2023.
[96] L. Wang, X. Zhao, Z. Lu, L. Wang, and S. Zhang, “Enhancing privacy
preservation and trustworthiness for decentralized federated learning,”
Information Sciences, vol. 628, pp. 449–468, 2023.
[97] J. Jiang and L. Hu, “Decentralised federated learning with adaptive
partial gradient aggregation,” CAAI Transactions on Intelligence
Technology, vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 230–236, 2020.
[98] B. Camajori Tedeschini et al. , “Decentralized federated learning for
healthcare networks: A case study on tumor segmentation,” IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 8693–8708, 2022.
[99] P. Vepakomma, O. Gupta, T. Swedish, and R. Raskar, “Split learning
for health: Distributed deep learning without sharing raw patient data,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.00564 , 2018.
[100] L. Barbieri, S. Savazzi, and M. Nicoli, “A layer selection optimizer for
communication-efficient decentralized federated deep learning,” IEEE
Access, vol. 11, pp. 22 155–22 173, 2023.
[101] W. Liu, L. Chen, and W. Zhang, “Decentralized federated learning:
Balancing communication and computing costs,” IEEE Transactions
on Signal and Information Processing over Networks , vol. 8, pp. 131–
143, 2022.
[102] W. Liu, L. Chen, Y . Chen, and W. Wang, “Communication-efficient
design for quantized decentralized federated learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.08423, 2023.
[103] H. Tang, S. Gan, C. Zhang, T. Zhang, and J. Liu, “Communication
compression for decentralized training,” in 32nd International
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems , ser. NIPS’18.
Curran Associates Inc., 2018, p. 7663–7673.
[104] K. Yuan, Q. Ling, and W. Yin, “On the convergence of decentralized
gradient descent,” SIAM Journal on Optimization , vol. 26, no. 3, pp.
1835–1854, 2016.
[105] W. Shi, Q. Ling, K. Yuan, G. Wu, and W. Yin, “On the linear
convergence of the admm in decentralized consensus optimization,”
IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , vol. 62, no. 7, pp. 1750–
1761, 2014.
[106] W. Shi, Q. Ling, G. Wu, and W. Yin, “EXTRA: An exact first-order
algorithm for decentralized consensus optimization,” SIAM Journal on
Optimization, vol. 25, no. 2, pp. 944–966, 2015.
[107] W. Deng, M.-J. Lai, Z. Peng, and W. Yin, “Parallel multi-block ADMM
with o(1/k) convergence,” Journal of Scientific Computing , vol. 71,
no. 2, pp. 712–736, 2017.
[108] S. Wu, D. Huang, and H. Wang, “Network gradient descent algorithm
for decentralized federated learning,” Journal of Business & Economic
Statistics, pp. 1–13, 2022.
[109] D. Alistarh, D. Grubic, J. Li, R. Tomioka, and M. V ojnovic, “QSGD:
Communication-efficient SGD via gradient quantization and encoding,”
in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, I. Guyon et al.,
Eds., vol. 30. Curran Associates, Inc., 2017.
[110] D. Basu, D. Data, C. Karakus, and S. Diggavi, Qsparse-Local-
SGD: Distributed SGD with Quantization, Sparsification, and Local
Computations. Curran Associates Inc., 2019.
[111] Y . Shi et al. , “Improving the model consistency of decentralized
federated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.04083 , 2023.
[112] X. Li, Y . Li, J. Wang, C. Chen, L. Yang, and Z. Zheng, “Decentralized
federated meta-learning framework for few-shot multitask learning,”
International Journal of Intelligent Systems , vol. 37, no. 11, pp. 8490–
8522, 2022.
[113] R. Anil, G. Pereyra, A. T. Passos, R. Ormandi, G. Dahl, and
G. Hinton, “Large scale distributed neural network training through
online distillation,” in 6th International Conference on Learning
Representations, ICLR 2018 , 2018.
[114] H. Seo, J. Park, S. Oh, M. Bennis, and S.-L. Kim, “Federated
knowledge distillation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2011.02367 , 2020.
[115] C. Wu, F. Wu, L. Lyu, Y . Huang, and X. Xie, “Communication-efficient
federated learning via knowledge distillation,”Nature Communications,
vol. 13, no. 1, p. 2032, 2022.
[116] I. Shiri et al. , “Decentralized distributed multi-institutional pet image
segmentation using a federated deep learning framework,” Clinical
Nuclear Medicine, vol. 47, no. 7, 2022.
[117] K. Hsieh, A. Phanishayee, O. Mutlu, and P. B. Gibbons, “The non-iid
data quagmire of decentralized machine learning,” in37th International
Conference on Machine Learning , ser. ICML’20. JMLR.org, 2020.
[118] H. Gao, M. T. Thai, and J. Wu, “When decentralized optimization
meets federated learning,” IEEE Network, vol. In press, pp. 1–7, 2023.
[119] Y . Shi et al. , “Towards more suitable personalization in federated
learning via decentralized partial model training,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.15157, 2023.
[120] M. Duan et al. , “FedGroup: Efficient federated learning via
decomposed similarity-based clustering,” in IEEE Intl Conf on
Parallel & Distributed Processing with Applications, Big Data &
Cloud Computing, Sustainable Computing & Communications, Social
Computing & Networking , 2021, pp. 228–237.
[121] C. Hu, J. Jiang, and Z. Wang, “Decentralized federated learning: A
segmented gossip approach,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1908.07782 , 2019.
[122] A. Schwab and J. Lunze, “A distributed algorithm to maintain a
proximity communication network among mobile agents using the
delaunay triangulation,” European Journal of Control, vol. 60, pp. 125–
134, 2021.
[123] Y . Ye, H. Chen, Z. Ma, and M. Xiao, “Decentralized consensus
optimization based on parallel random walk,” IEEE Communications
Letters, vol. 24, no. 2, pp. 391–395, 2020.
[124] N. Rodríguez-Barroso, D. Jiménez-López, M. V . Luzón, F. Herrera, and
E. Martínez-Cámara, “Survey on federated learning threats: Concepts,
taxonomy on attacks and defences, experimental study and challenges,”
Information Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 148–173, 2023.
[125] J. Wang, X. Chang, R. J. Rodrìguez, and Y . Wang, “Assessing
anonymous and selfish free-rider attacks in federated learning,” inIEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communications , 2022, pp. 1–6.
[126] H. Wang, L. Muñoz González, D. Eklund, and S. Raza, “Non-IID
data re-balancing at IoT edge with peer-to-peer federated learning for
anomaly detection,” in 14th ACM Conference on Security and Privacy
in Wireless and Mobile Networks , ser. WiSec ’21. Association for
Computing Machinery, 2021, p. 153–163.
[127] X. Ma and D. Xu, “Torr: A lightweight blockchain for decentralized
federated learning,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. In press, pp.
1–1, 2023.
[128] L. Huang, A. L. Shea, H. Qian, A. Masurkar, H. Deng, and D. Liu,
“Patient clustering improves efficiency of federated machine learning
to predict mortality and hospital stay time using distributed electronic
medical records,” Journal of Biomedical Informatics , vol. 99, p.
103291, 2019.
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 30
[129] A. Nedic and A. Ozdaglar, “Distributed subgradient methods for multi-
agent optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 54,
no. 1, pp. 48–61, 2009.
[130] Z. Chen, D. Li, J. Zhu, and S. Zhang, “DACFL: Dynamic average
consensus-based federated learning in decentralized sensors network,”
Sensors, vol. 22, no. 9, 2022.
[131] T. Sun, D. Li, and B. Wang, “Decentralized federated averaging,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence , vol. 45,
no. 4, pp. 4289–4301, 2023.
[132] Y . Yuan et al. , “Decefl: a principled fully decentralized federated
learning framework,” National Science Open , vol. 2, no. 1, p.
20220043, 2023.
[133] S. Minsker and N. Strawn, “Distributed statistical estimation and
rates of convergence in normal approximation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.02658, 2017.
[134] X. Mao, K. Yuan, Y . Hu, Y . Gu, A. H. Sayed, and W. Yin, “Walkman:
A communication-efficient random-walk algorithm for decentralized
optimization,” IEEE Transactions on Signal Processing , vol. 68, pp.
2513–2528, 2020.
[135] X. Mao, Y . Gu, and W. Yin, “Walk proximal gradient: An energy-
efficient algorithm for consensus optimization,” IEEE Internet of
Things Journal, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 2048–2060, 2019.
[136] D. C. Nguyen, S. Hosseinalipour, D. J. Love, P. N. Pathirana, and C. G.
Brinton, “Latency optimization for blockchain-empowered federated
learning in multi-server edge computing,” IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications , vol. 40, no. 12, pp. 3373–3390, 2022.
[137] S. Zhu and B. Chen, “Quantized consensus by the ADMM:
Probabilistic versus deterministic quantizers,” IEEE Transactions on
Signal Processing, vol. 64, no. 7, pp. 1700–1713, 2016.
[138] S. K. Singh, L. T. Yang, and J. H. Park, “Fusionfedblock: Fusion of
blockchain and federated learning to preserve privacy in industry 5.0,”
Information Fusion, vol. 90, pp. 233–240, 2023.
[139] I. A. Ridhawi, S. Otoum, and M. Aloqaily, “Decentralized
zero-trust framework for digital twin-based 6g,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.03107, 2023.
[140] X. Lian, C. Zhang, H. Zhang, C.-J. Hsieh, W. Zhang, and J. Liu, “Can
decentralized algorithms outperform centralized algorithms? a case
study for decentralized parallel stochastic gradient descent,” in 31st
International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems ,
ser. NIPS’17. Curran Associates Inc., 2017, p. 5336–5346.
[141] G. Hinton, O. Vinyals, and J. Dean, “Distilling the knowledge in a
neural network,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1503.02531 , 2015.
[142] M. H. Rehman, A. M. Dirir, K. Salah, E. Damiani, and D. Svetinovic,
“TrustFed: A framework for fair and trustworthy cross-device federated
learning in IIoT,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17,
no. 12, pp. 8485–8494, 2021.
[143] Google, “Tensorflow federated,” TensorFlow, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://www.tensorflow.org/federated
[144] A. Ziller et al. , PySyft: A Library for Easy Federated Learning .
Springer International Publishing, 2021, pp. 111–139.
[145] Y . Xie et al., “FederatedScope: A flexible federated learning platform
for heterogeneity,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.05011 , 2022.
[146] C. He et al., “FedML: A research library and benchmark for federated
machine learning,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, Best Paper Award at Federate Learning Workshop , 2020.
[147] S. Caldas et al. , “Leaf: A benchmark for federated settings,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:1812.01097, 2018.
[148] A. G. Roy, S. Siddiqui, S. Pölsterl, N. Navab, and C. Wachinger,
“BrainTorrent: A peer-to-peer environment for decentralized federated
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.06731 , 2019.
[149] C. Pappas, D. Chatzopoulos, S. Lalis, and M. Vavalis, “IPLS: A
framework for decentralized federated learning,” in IFIP Networking
Conference, 2021, pp. 1–6.
[150] M. Ghanem, F. Dawoud, H. Gamal, E. Soliman, H. Sharara, and T. El-
Batt, “FLoBC: A decentralized blockchain-based federated learning
framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.11873 , 2021.
[151] J. Li et al. , “Blockchain assisted decentralized federated learning
(BLADE-FL): Performance analysis and resource allocation,” IEEE
Transactions on Parallel and Distributed Systems , vol. 33, no. 10, pp.
2401–2415, 2022.
[152] C. Che, X. Li, C. Chen, X. He, and Z. Zheng, “A decentralized
federated learning framework via committee mechanism with
convergence guarantee,”IEEE Transactions on Parallel and Distributed
Systems, vol. 33, no. 12, pp. 4783–4800, 2022.
[153] E. T. Martínez Beltrán et al., “Fedstellar: A Platform for Decentralized
Federated Learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.09750 , 2023.
[154] A. Krizhevsky, “Learning multiple layers of features from tiny
images,” 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www.cs.toronto.edu/~kriz/
learning-features-2009-TR.pdf
[155] A. Go, R. Bhayani, and L. Huang, “Twitter sentiment classification
using distant supervision,” 2009. [Online]. Available: https://www-cs.
stanford.edu/people/alecmgo/papers/TwitterDistantSupervision09.pdf
[156] D. Gurung, S. R. Pokhrel, and G. Li, “Decentralized quantum federated
learning for metaverse: Analysis, design and implementation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.11297, 2023.
[157] X. Zhou et al. , “Decentralized p2p federated learning for privacy-
preserving and resilient mobile robotic systems,” IEEE Wireless
Communications, vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 82–89, 2023.
[158] Q. Liu et al. , “Asynchronous decentralized federated learning for
collaborative fault diagnosis of pv stations,” IEEE Transactions on
Network Science and Engineering , vol. 9, no. 3, pp. 1680–1696, 2022.
[159] M. Nakıp, B. C. Gül, and E. Gelenbe, “Decentralized online federated
g-network learning for lightweight intrusion detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2306.13029, 2023.
[160] D. Liu, T. Miller, R. Sayeed, and K. D. Mandl, “FADL: Federated-
autonomous deep learning for distributed electronic health record,”
2018.
[161] T. J. Pollard, A. E. W. Johnson, J. D. Raffa, L. A. Celi, R. G. Mark,
and O. Badawi, “The eICU collaborative research database, a freely
available multi-center database for critical care research,” Scientific
Data, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 180178, 2018.
[162] S. Lu, Y . Zhang, and Y . Wang, “Decentralized federated learning for
electronic health records,” in 54th Annual Conference on Information
Sciences and Systems , 2020, pp. 1–5.
[163] H. Elayan, M. Aloqaily, and M. Guizani, “Deep federated learning for
IoT-based decentralized healthcare systems,” in International Wireless
Communications and Mobile Computing , 2021, pp. 105–109.
[164] S. Warnat-Herresthal et al. , “Swarm learning for decentralized and
confidential clinical machine learning,” Nature, vol. 594, no. 7862, pp.
265–270, 2021.
[165] N. C. for Biotechnology Information, “Geo dataset browser,”
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov, 2016. [Online]. Available: https://www.ncbi.n
lm.nih.gov/sites/GDSbrowser/
[166] X. Wang, Y . Peng, L. Lu, Z. Lu, M. Bagheri, and R. M. Summers,
ChestX-ray: Hospital-Scale Chest X-ray Database and Benchmarks on
Weakly Supervised Classification and Localization of Common Thorax
Diseases. Springer International Publishing, 2019, pp. 369–392.
[167] M. M. Salim and J. H. Park, “Federated learning-based secure
electronic health record sharing scheme in medical informatics,” IEEE
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics , vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 617–
624, 2023.
[168] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei,
“ImageNet: A large-scale hierarchical image database,” in IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition , 2009, pp.
248–255.
[169] B. H. Menze et al., “The multimodal brain tumor image segmentation
benchmark (brats),” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 34,
no. 10, pp. 1993–2024, 2015.
[170] K. H. Zou, A. Liu, A. I. Bandos, L. Ohno-Machado, and H. E. Rockette,
Statistical Evaluation of Diagnostic Performance, 1st ed. CRC, 2011.
[171] X. Yang, X. He, J. Zhao, Y . Zhang, S. Zhang, and P. Xie, “COVID-
CT-Dataset: A CT Scan Dataset about COVID-19,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2003.13865, 2020.
[172] A. Dos, “Predicting human eye diseases,” Kaggle.com, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/fabianogalaxy/dataset-wit
h-catarats-images
[173] M. Jennings, “Skin-cancer-identification,” GitHub, 2021. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/Matt-Jennings-GitHub/Skin-Cancer-Ide
ntification
[174] L. Deng, “The MNIST database of handwritten digit images for
machine learning research,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 29,
no. 6, pp. 141–142, 2012.
[175] M. Pennisi et al. , “Decentralized distributed learning with privacy-
preserving data synthesis,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2206.10048 , 2022.
[176] S. Candemir et al. , “Lung segmentation in chest radiographs using
anatomical atlases with nonrigid registration,” IEEE Transactions on
Medical Imaging, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 577–590, 2014.
[177] S. Jaeger et al. , “Automatic tuberculosis screening using chest
radiographs,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging , vol. 33, no. 2,
pp. 233–245, 2014.
[178] P. Tschandl, C. Rosendahl, and H. Kittler, “The HAM10000 dataset,
a large collection of multi-source dermatoscopic images of common
pigmented skin lesions,” Scientific Data, vol. 5, no. 1, p. 180161, 2018.
IEEE COMMUNICATIONS SURVEYS AND TUTORIALS 31
[179] Y . Tian, S. Wang, J. Xiong, R. Bi, Z. Zhou, and M. Z. A. Bhuiyan,
“Robust and privacy-preserving decentralized deep federated learning
training: Focusing on digital healthcare applications,” IEEE/ACM
Transactions on Computational Biology and Bioinformatics , vol. In
press, pp. 1–12, 2023.
[180] S. Savazzi, “Federated learning: mmwave mimo radar dataset for
testing,” IEEE Dataport, 2020.
[181] Y . Qu, S. R. Pokhrel, S. Garg, L. Gao, and Y . Xiang, “A blockchained
federated learning framework for cognitive computing in industry 4.0
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 17, no. 4,
pp. 2964–2973, 2021.
[182] Y . Meidan et al. , “N-BaIoT: Network-Based Detection of IoT Botnet
Attacks Using Deep Autoencoders,” IEEE Pervasive Computing ,
vol. 17, no. 3, pp. 12–22, 2018.
[183] Z. Lian and C. Su, “Decentralized federated learning for Internet of
Things anomaly detection,” in ACM on Asia Conference on Computer
and Communications Security. Association for Computing Machinery,
2022, p. 1249–1251.
[184] S. Garcia, A. Parmisano, and M. J. Erquiaga, “IoT-23: A labeled dataset
with malicious and benign IoT network traffic,” 2020.
[185] M. Abdel-Basset, N. Moustafa, and H. Hawash, “Privacy-preserved
cyberattack detection in Industrial Edge of Things (IEoT): A
blockchain-orchestrated federated learning approach,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Informatics, vol. 18, no. 11, pp. 7920–7934,
2022.
[186] A. Alsaedi, N. Moustafa, Z. Tari, A. Mahmood, and A. Anwar,
“TON_IoT Telemetry Dataset: A New Generation Dataset of IoT
and IIoT for Data-Driven Intrusion Detection Systems,” IEEE Access,
vol. 8, pp. 165 130–165 150, 2020.
[187] R. Damasevicius et al. , “LITNET-2020: An annotated real-world
network flow dataset for network intrusion detection,” Electronics,
vol. 9, no. 5, 2020.
[188] H. Ochiai, Y . Sun, Q. Jin, N. Wongwiwatchai, and H. Esaki, “Wireless
ad hoc federated learning: A fully distributed cooperative machine
learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2205.11779 , 2022.
[189] T. Ranathunga, A. McGibney, S. Rea, and S. Bharti, “Blockchain-based
decentralized model aggregation for cross-silo federated learning in
industry 4.0,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , vol. 10, no. 5, pp.
4449–4461, 2023.
[190] D. Monschein, J. A. Peregrina Pérez, T. Piotrowski, Z. Nochta,
O. P. Waldhorst, and C. Zirpins, “Towards a peer-to-peer federated
machine learning environment for continuous authentication,” in IEEE
Symposium on Computers and Communications , 2021, pp. 1–6.
[191] Y . Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y . Zhang,
“Communication-efficient federated learning and permissioned
blockchain for digital twin edge networks,” IEEE Internet of Things
Journal, vol. 8, no. 4, pp. 2276–2288, 2021.
[192] H. Xiao, K. Rasul, and R. V ollgraf, “Fashion-MNIST: a novel image
dataset for benchmarking machine learning algorithms,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1708.07747, 2017.
[193] F. Wilhelmi, E. Guerra, and P. Dini, “On the decentralization of
blockchain-enabled asynchronous federated learning,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2205.10201, 2022.
[194] G. Cohen, S. Afshar, J. Tapson, and A. van Schaik, “EMNIST:
an extension of mnist to handwritten letters,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1702.05373, 2017.
[195] D. Yang, D. Zhang, V . W. Zheng, and Z. Yu, “Modeling user activity
preference by leveraging user spatial temporal characteristics in lbsns,”
IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics: Systems, vol. 45,
no. 1, pp. 129–142, 2015.
[196] E. Cho, S. A. Myers, and J. Leskovec, “Friendship and mobility: User
movement in location-based social networks,” in 17th ACM SIGKDD
International Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining ,
2011, p. 1082–1090.
[197] F. M. Harper and J. A. Konstan, “The MovieLens Datasets: History
and context,” ACM Trans. Interact. Intell. Syst. , vol. 5, 2015.
[198] B. Rozemberczki, C. Allen, and R. Sarkar, “Multi-Scale attributed node
embedding,” Journal of Complex Networks , vol. 9, no. 2, 2021.
[199] Q. Pan, Y . Zhu, and L. Chu, “Lumos: Heterogeneity-aware
federated graph learning over decentralized devices,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.00492, 2023.
[200] B. Rozemberczki and R. Sarkar, “Characteristic functions on graphs:
Birds of a feather, from statistical descriptors to parametric models,”
in Association for Computing Machinery , 2020, p. 1325–1334.
[201] I. Arapakis, P. Papadopoulos, K. Katevas, and D. Perino, “P4l: Privacy
preserving peer-to-peer learning for infrastructureless setups,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2302.13438, 2023.
[202] “Avito context ad clicks,” Kaggle.com, 2016. [Online]. Available:
https://www.kaggle.com/c/avito-context-ad-clicks
[203] A. L. Maas, R. E. Daly, P. T. Pham, D. Huang, A. Y . Ng, and C. Potts,
“Learning word vectors for sentiment analysis,” in49th Annual Meeting
of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language
Technologies, 2011, p. 142–150.
[204] E. Jeong and M. Kountouris, “Personalized decentralized
federated learning with knowledge distillation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.12156, 2023.
[205] “Iot device identification,” Kaggle.com, 2021. [Online]. Available: ht
tps://www.kaggle.com/datasets/fanbyprinciple/iot-device-identification
[206] A. Salama, A. Stergioulis, A. M. Hayajneh, S. A. R. Zaidi,
D. McLernon, and I. Robertson, “Decentralized federated learning over
slotted aloha wireless mesh networking,” IEEE Access , vol. 11, pp.
18 326–18 342, 2023.
[207] W. Koch, “On digital ethics for artificial intelligence in hybrid military
operations,” 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.sto.nato.int/publi
cations/STO%20Meeting%20Proceedings/STO-MP-IST-190/MP-IST
-190-22.pdf
[208] N. I. Mowla, N. H. Tran, I. Doh, and K. Chae, “Federated learning-
based cognitive detection of jamming attack in flying ad-hoc network,”
IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 4338–4350, 2020.
[209] O. Puñal, C. Pereira, A. Aguiar, and J. Gross, “CRAWDAD dataset
uportorwthaachen/vanetjamming2014 (v. 2014-05-12),” 2014.
[210] G. F. Riley and T. R. Henderson, The ns-3 Network Simulator .
Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2010, pp. 15–34.
[211] P. K. Sharma, J. H. Park, and K. Cho, “Blockchain and
federated learning-based distributed computing defence framework for
sustainable society,”Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 59, p. 102220,
2020.
[212] Y . Qu et al. , “Decentralized federated learning for UA V networks:
Architecture, challenges, and opportunities,” IEEE Network , vol. 35,
no. 6, pp. 156–162, 2021.
[213] C. Zhu, X. Zhu, J. Ren, and T. Qin, “Blockchain-enabled federated
learning for UA V edge computing network: Issues and solutions,”IEEE
Access, vol. 10, pp. 56 591–56 610, 2022.
[214] M. S. Al-Abiad, M. Hassan, and M. Hossain, “Decentralized model
dissemination empowered federated learning in mmwave aerial-
terrestrial integrated networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00032 ,
2023.
[215] A. Giannopoulos, P. Gkonis, P. Bithas, N. Nomikos, G. Ntroulias,
and P. Trakadas, “Federated learning for maritime environments:use
cases, experimental results, and open issues,” TechRxiv preprint
techrxiv.22133549.v1, 2023.
[216] C. Reiser, “creiser/drone-detection,” GitHub, 2022. [Online]. Available:
https://github.com/creiser/drone-detection
[217] R. Fisher, “Cvonline: Image databases,” 2019. [Online]. Available:
https://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/rbf/CV online/Imagedbase.htm
[218] E. T. Martínez Beltrán, M. Quiles Pérez, S. López Bernal, G. Martínez
Pérez, and A. Huertas Celdrán, “SAFECAR: A brain–computer
interface and intelligent framework to detect drivers’ distractions,”
Expert Systems with Applications , vol. 203, p. 117402, 2022.
[219] Y . Lu, X. Huang, K. Zhang, S. Maharjan, and Y . Zhang, “Blockchain
empowered asynchronous federated learning for secure data sharing
in Internet of Vehicles,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular Technology ,
vol. 69, no. 4, pp. 4298–4311, 2020.
[220] S. R. Pokhrel and J. Choi, “Federated learning with blockchain
for autonomous vehicles: Analysis and design challenges,” IEEE
Transactions on Communications, vol. 68, no. 8, pp. 4734–4746, 2020.
[221] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for autonomous
driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite,” in Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) , 2012.
[222] H. Caesar et al. , “nuScenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous
driving,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1903.11027 , 2019.
[223] F. Bragato et al., “Towards decentralized predictive quality of service in
next-generation vehicular networks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.11268,
2023.
[224] X. Hu, R. Li, Y . Ning, K. Ota, and L. Wang, “A data sharing scheme
based on federated learning in iov,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology, vol. In press, pp. 1–13, 2023.