3016 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025
Decentralized Edge Workload Forecasting
With Gossip Learning
Alessandro Tundo , Federica Filippini, Francesco Regonesi, Michele Ciavotta ,
and Marco Savi , Member, IEEE
Abstract—Edge computing has emerged as a crucial paradigm
for addressing the growing demands of interconnected devices
and large-scale mobile applications by relocating computation
and storage services closer to end-users. Edge workloads are
inherently volatile and challenging to forecast due to their
dependence on factors such as human mobility patterns and
geographically-distributed infrastructure, combined with the
dynamic nature of edge nodes. Traditional centralized approaches
to workload forecasting are inadequate in the context of decen-
tralized and failure-prone edge environments. To address this
challenge, this paper investigates workload forecasting using
Gossip Learning (GL), an asynchronous peer-to-peer learning
protocol. GL allows for the training of forecasting models in a
fully-decentralized manner, thereby mitigating single point of fail-
ure risks and enhancing overall system robustness. We extended
the original protocol across multiple dimensions to improve
convergence, reduce communication overhead, and enhance
resilience to failures. We evaluated the proposed approach
through extensive simulations; the obtained results demonstrate
its effectiveness with respect to classical methods, rendering it a
promising solution to enhance load balancing and task ofﬂoading
strategies at the edge, thereby ensuring Quality-of-Service (QoS)
and reducing Service Level Agreement (SLA) violations.
Index Terms —Edge computing, workload forecasting, gossip
learning, function-as-a-service, machine learning.
I. I NTRODUCTION
E
DGE computing has rapidly evolved to complement
and extend cloud computing, addressing the increasing
demands of interconnected devices and large-scale mobile
applications. This paradigm shifts computation and storage
services closer to users by positioning them at the network
Received 31 July 2024; revised 19 March 2025; accepted 6 May 2025.
Date of publication 15 May 2025; date of current version 7 August 2025.
This research was partially funded by the European Union - Next Generation
EU under the Italian National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), Mission
4, Component 2, Investment 1.3, CUP E83C22004640001, partnership on
“Telecommunications of the Future” (PE00000001 - program “RESTART”).
This research was funded in whole or in part by the Austrian Science Fund
(FWF) [10.55776/P36870; 10.55776/PAT1668223]. For open access purposes,
the author has applied a CC BY public copyright license to any author
accepted manuscript version arising from this submission. The associate editor
coordinating the review of this article and approving it for publication was
A. Sacco. (Alessandro Tundo and Federica Filippini equally contributed to
this work.) (Corresponding author: Alessandro Tundo.)
Alessandro Tundo is with the Institute of Information Systems
Engineering, Technische Universität Wien, 1040 Vienna, Austria (e-mail:
alessandro.tundo@tuwien.ac.at).
Federica Filippini, Francesco Regonesi, Michele Ciavotta, and
Marco Savi are with the Department of Informatics, Systems and
Communication, University of Milano-Bicocca, 20126 Milan, Italy
(e-mail: federica.ﬁlippini@unimib.it; regonesifrancesco@gmail.com;
marco.savi@unimib.it; michele.ciavotta@unimib.it).
Digital Object Identiﬁer 10.1109/TNSM.2025.3570450
edge, thereby meeting the requirements for ultra-low latency,
location awareness, optimized bandwidth allocation, reduced
execution costs, and lower energy consumption [1]. However,
edge computing also introduces unique challenges due to its
dynamic and geographically-dispersed nature. Edge workloads
are particularly volatile and difﬁcult to predict as they depend
on several factors like the interaction between human mobility
patterns and a geo-distributed computing infrastructure [2] and
the particular application scenario (e.g., IoT data ingestion
and processing [3], [4], [5], Machine Learning (ML) model
inference and training [6], [7], [8], or virtual network func-
tions (VNFs) execution [9], [10], [11]). Moreover, edge nodes
are often heterogeneous, with limited capacity, and tend to
join and leave the network due to unpredictable link and node
failures. Consequently, deﬁning optimal resource allocation
and task ofﬂoading policies to guarantee Quality-of-Service
(QoS) and avoid Service Level Agreement (SLA) violations at
runtime is signiﬁcantly more complex compared to centralized
cloud scenarios. Furthermore, security and privacy concerns
must be carefully addressed at every decision level, as they
are crucial in an ecosystem with a broader attack surface than
cloud systems [1].
Research in this area has aimed to tackle these chal-
lenges by proposing peer-to-peer (P2P) solutions for managing
network dynamics arising at the edge [12]. As for workload
prediction, over the last decade, a variety of techniques have
been proposed within the context of cloud computing [13].
However, little effort has been put to adopt (variants of) these
techniques to P2P-based edge computing. ML-based workload
forecasting using P2P (or decentralized) learning can be
extremely advantageous in a fully-decentralized edge environ-
ment [14]: this approach takes advantage of contributions from
different nodes to construct a forecasting model tailored to
each node. Unlike a model trained only on a node’s local data,
this method offers better generalization, and preserves privacy
while minimizing bandwidth utilization.
Among the variants of P2P learning, Gossip Learning (GL)
stands out as a decentralized, asynchronous approach [15].
In GL, peers (i.e., participant nodes) communicate directly
to update their models [16], eliminating the need for a
central system to aggregate locally-trained models, as required
in other distributed learning approaches such as Federated
Learning (FL) [17]. This feature makes GL particularly suit-
able for P2P edge environments, as it eliminates the risk of a
single point of failure and leverages the existing P2P network
to build the workload forecasting model.
c⃝ 2025 The Authors. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License.
For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/
TUNDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED EDGE WORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING 3017
Moreover, GL addresses the challenges in developing such
a model for a geographically-dispersed environment with
unreliable nodes by allowing asynchronous model updates.
This method ensures that information eventually disseminates
throughout the entire edge network [15]. In addition, by incor-
porating contributions from various nodes, each node’s model
can capture a wide range of workload patterns, achieving a
balance between generalization and speciﬁcity. This balance is
essential in a decentralized learning context, allowing nodes to
handle out-of-distribution trafﬁc patterns effectively. Finally, a
well-generalized model can be adopted by new nodes joining
the network, even if they lack historical data to develop their
own models.
This paper introduces Gossip Learning as a solution for
decentralized workload forecasting in edge environments .
While our proposed method is generally applicable to a
variety of edge computing scenarios, we adopt, as a motiva-
tional example, DFaaS [18], a decentralized edge environment
that implements the serverless Function-as-a-Service (FaaS)
model. In this context, we focus on forecasting the workload—
a critical step towards enabling improved responsiveness,
resource scaling, and distribution at the edge [3], [18], [19],
[20], [21], [22].
We enhance the GL protocol to better align with the
characteristics and challenges of decentralized edge comput-
ing. In particular, we propose a performance-based approach
inspired by PENS [23] to selectively merge models from
neighbors, increasing the robustness. We also propose a
novel merge strategy, Age-Weighted Overwrite, which uses the
model age to probabilistically decide model overwrites. In
addition, we explore FixedUpdates and EarlyStopping criteria
to prevent overﬁtting. Moreover, we implemented and publicly
released a discrete-event simulator capable of simulating
GL with various network topologies and stopping criteria,
which is a feature not available in other simulators [24], [25].
An open-source prototype of the simulator is publicly
accessible [26].
Finally, we conducted an extensive empirical evaluation
to assess the applicability of GL for workload forecasting
in P2P edge topologies. In particular, we considered ﬁve
dimensions: (i) the performance of GL in this domain, com-
pared to classical approaches (i.e., ofﬂine-only, centralized,
and Federated Learning); (ii) the impact of GL parameters on
performance; (iii) the scalability and network overhead of GL;
(iv) the robustness of GL to node failures; (v) the demand
for computational resources during training. Our experiments
leveraged both real workload traces from FaaS applications
and synthetic instances. All experimental materials arepublicly
available on Zenodo [27] and on GitHub [26].
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II
provides background information that introduces the Gossip
Learning protocol. Section III describes our motivational
scenario and the approach we propose to tackle the problem of
decentralized load forecasting. Section IV provides details on
the discrete-event simulator. Sections V and VI present details
of the experimental setup and empirical evaluation. SectionVII
discusses the related work. Finally, Section VIII outlines the
conclusions and possible future research directions.
II. B ACKGROUND
Learning in distributed systems, where data resides on
distinct nodes, presents a challenge due to network and com-
putational scalability limitations, and privacy concerns [17].
Federated Learning (FL) [17] was initially proposed by
Google as a means of training the model underlying its
predictive keyboard (GBoard) while preserving user privacy. In
FL, model training is distributed across multiple workers, each
holding a private local dataset. A central server coordinates the
training process by periodically selecting a subset of workers,
elaborating the latest global model and transmitting it to them.
The selected workers perform local training on their respective
datasets for a predeﬁned number of epochs and return model
updates–typically in the form of weight updates or gradients–
to the server. The server then aggregates them to reﬁne the
global model before the next training round.
FL is currently widely adopted for tasks outside the origi-
nal scenario, including energy consumption forecasting [28],
base station trafﬁc forecasting [29] and many others [30].
Nevertheless, a single aggregation point (i.e., the main server)
is still required to reconstruct the global model, which is
challenging to achieve in decentralized edge computing sce-
narios where nodes are generally considered unreliable due to
unpredictable failures (e.g., in network links) [1].
Gossip Learning is an optimization framework for the
training of ML models in decentralized environments [31].
In GL, all nodes act as equal peers, each independently
training a local ML model using its private dataset. Instead of
relying on a central server, nodes periodically exchange model
updates with randomly-chosen peers in a decentralized, peer-
to-peer manner. Through these exchanges, models gradually
incorporate knowledge from different nodes as propagated
across the network. Unlike Federated Learning, where a single
global model is aggregated, Gossip Learning results in a
diverse set of models–one per node–each shaped by the
speciﬁc sequence of updates it has received.
This approach is particularly well-suited for edge envi-
ronments, as it fully leverages the decentralized nature of
the system without requiring a central synchronization point.
Additionally, GL has been shown to achieve performance on
par to or even surpassing that of FL [15], while offering
enhanced robustness. By eliminating a single point of failure,
GL mitigates the vulnerabilities associated with centralized
architectures, making it more resilient to node failures and
network disruptions.
In this work, each node participating in the GL proto-
col must implement a deﬁned interface that supports two
primary operations, formally deﬁned by the asynchronous
procedures MainLoop and OnReceiveModel, as detailed
in Algorithm 1.T h eMainLoop routine periodically dissem-
inates model updates w along with contextual information
c (e.g., the node’s univocal identiﬁcator) to a subset of its
peer nodes.
1 The OnReceiveModel procedure is triggered
1Model updates may consist of the full set of model parameters, a subset
of it, or the model’s gradient computed with respect to local data. This work
adopts a representation where updates refer to (a subset of) model weights,
aligning with the implementation considered in this paper.
3018 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025
Algorithm 1 Gossip Learning Routines
1: async procedure MAIN LOOP ()
2: while true do
3: peers ← SELECT PEERS ()
4: SEND ((c, w), peers)
5: wait(Δt) ⊿ Δt is the model transmission time
6: end while
7: end procedure
8: async procedure ONRECEIVE UPDATE (cr, wr )
9: (c, w) ← MERGE ((c, w), (cr, wr))
10: (c, w) ← TRAIN ((c, w), Dl ) ⊿ Dl is the node dataset
11: c ← UPDATE CONTEXT ((c, w), (cr, wr), Dl )
12: end procedure
upon receiving an update from a peer node, integrating the
received model with the local one, ﬁne-tuning it using the
node’s dataset, and updating the context. 2
The following Sections II-A and II-B provide further details
about peer selection and merge strategies.
A. Peer Selection
Indiscriminately broadcasting model updates to a large
number of neighbors is inefﬁcient and impractical under
bandwidth constraints. In GL, nodes–particularly those with
high connectivity–must carefully select a subset of peers
for model transmission to balance communication overhead
and learning efﬁcacy. The selectPeers routine plays a
crucial role in managing the trade-off between exploration
and exploitation in decentralized learning. It is responsible for
peer discovery [32] and selecting one [15] or, rarely, more
peers [33] to send the local model (unicast vs. multicast).
Peer selection strategies can be broadly classiﬁed as static
or dynamic. Static strategies maintain a ﬁxed set of target peers
throughout training, ensuring stable communication patterns
but potentially limiting convergence speed, reliability, and
model diversity. In contrast, dynamic strategies adaptively
select peers at each iteration, introducing variability that may
enhance learning efﬁciency.
The effectiveness of a peer selection strategy depends on
the underlying network topology and application requirements.
In fully-decentralized settings, random peer selection provides
robustness to node failures [34]. Other methods incorpo-
rate topology-aware selection and node prioritization based
on factors such as model similarity, learning progress, or
network proximity [35], [36], [37], improving convergence
speed and reducing communication overhead. As speciﬁed in
Section III-C, in this paper we adopt a strategy called Active-
Peer Random Selection, due to its high robustness to failures.
B. Merge Strategy
In distributed/decentralized learning, the Merge strategy
governs how local models are integrated, shaping both con-
vergence dynamics and model diversity. These strategies can
2For clarity and generality, context updates are explicitly represented by
theUpdateContext procedure in Algorithm 1. However, they may also be
handled within MERGE or TRAIN, depending on the speciﬁc implementation.
be classiﬁed based on the nature of exchanged data, the
aggregation function employed, and their adaptability.
Parameter-based merging aggregates model parameters
through methods such as simple or weighted averaging, ensur-
ing stability but often struggling in non-iid settings, where
statistical heterogeneity degrades performance [38]. Notable
examples include Overwrite, and Simple Average [15].I n
Overwrite, the received model completely replaces the current
one. In Simple Average, the arithmetic mean of the received
model weights and the local model weights is computed to
mitigate the risk of complete information loss.
Adaptive merging dynamically adjusts aggregation weights
based on inter-model similarity, thereby improving gen-
eralization in heterogeneous conditions [15]. Conversely,
gradient-based merging transmits only gradient updates–
exempliﬁed by Decentralized Stochastic Gradient Descent
(DSGD)–offering communication efﬁciency but introducing
gradient staleness, which may hinder optimization [39]. While
research on GL often draws from FL, a direct transfer
of insights remains problematic, as FL assumptions do not
seamlessly extend to GL settings. A critical gap persists in
the literature, underscoring the need for targeted investigations
into the behaviors emerging within GL frameworks.
As speciﬁed in Section III-C, in this paper we consider,
in addition to Overwrite and Simple Average, two strategies
named Age-Weighted Average, ﬁrstly introduced in [15], and
the novel Age-Weighted Overwrite.
III. W
ORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING
This section presents our motivational scenario for workload
forecasting in decentralized edge environments. Details about
how the GL protocol was adapted to align more closely with
the speciﬁc characteristics of the problem at hand are then
provided and discussed.
A. Motivational Scenario
Several pertinent use cases for advanced computation at the
edge of the network have been identiﬁed in the literature.
These include mobile augmented reality (MAR) [16], [40],
trafﬁc safety applications [41], and IoT data process-
ing [3], [4], [5] just to mention a few.
A reference scenario is deﬁned herein, as illustrated in
Fig. 1, which depicts a network of telecommunication towers
equipped with computing and storage capabilities, thereby
functioning as edge computing nodes (ENs). Each EN hosts
an instance of the DFaaS platform, as initially proposed by
Ciavotta et al. [18].
DFaaS (Decentralized Function-as-a-Service) is a peer-
to-peer edge computing platform that implements the
Function-as-a-Service paradigm, enabling each node to exe-
cute serverless functions in response to client requests. Clients,
such as smartphones or other smart devices, initiate function
execution requests by selecting the node with the strongest
perceived signal—typically the nearest one. When a node’s
predicted incoming workload exceeds its available computing
resources, the node dynamically ofﬂoads excess requests to
TUNDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED EDGE WORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING 3019
Fig. 1. The motivational scenario representing a set of telecommunication
towers equipped with computing and storage capabilities, namely, edge
computing nodes (ENs). Each EN hosts an instance of the DFaaS platform,
initially proposed by Ciavotta et al. [18], and participates in the GL protocol.
the closest underutilized nodes, thereby mitigating congestion
and optimizing resource utilization.
A deﬁning characteristic of DFaaS is the absence of a cen-
tralized coordinator. All nodes operate in a fully-decentralized
manner, functionally identical and equal in their interactions.
Consequently, no master node governs network topology or
orchestrates task distribution. Instead, a P2P service discovery
protocol enables nodes to autonomously identify and commu-
nicate with one another, irrespective of the underlying physical
network topology or technology. This dynamic discovery
mechanism establishes an overlay network that facilitates
direct node-to-node communication.
Within this overlay network, DFaaS nodes continuously
exchange information regarding their operational state, latency,
and network topology changes. Latency data, in particular,
enables each node to identify and interact with a subset
of peers for which communication latency remains below a
threshold, ensuring proximity-based workload distribution.
B. Gossip Learning for Workload Prediction in DFaaS
Gossip Learning emerges as an ideal framework for training
the workload prediction models of DFaaS nodes, aligning
naturally with the platform’s decentralized architecture. Each
DFaaS node relies on an individual prediction model to
estimate its incoming workload, a critical factor in maintaining
efﬁcient resource allocation. An inaccurate model—whether
underestimating or overestimating future loads—can lead to
signiﬁcant inefﬁciencies: underestimation results in congestion
and request rejections, degrading the QoS, while overesti-
mation leads to unnecessary ofﬂoading, underutilizing local
computational resources.
A purely local training approach, based solely on a
node’s historical workload data, may fail to capture the
spatio-temporal correlations in workload variations across
neighboring nodes, particularly in mobility-driven edge
applications. Given DFaaS’s inherently peer-to-peer nature,
conventional Federated Learning techniques that rely on cen-
tralized aggregation are ill-suited due to the risk of vanishing
variance—a phenomenon in which the progressive loss of
diversity causes models to converge prematurely to suboptimal
solutions. Even hybrid approaches that employ leader election
mechanisms [42] would introduce unnecessary computational
overhead, disrupting the platform’s asynchronous operation.
In contrast, GL seamlessly integrates with DFaaS’s over-
lay network, enabling decentralized and continuous model
reﬁnement as nodes asynchronously exchange model updates
with their dynamically-discovered neighbors. The protocol can
be activated periodically (e.g., daily or weekly) or remain
continuously active. Continuous updates enhance adaptability
to workload variations by ensuring timely model adaptation,
but they also increase communication overhead [43].
C. Extensions to the Gossip Learning Protocol
The GL protocol described in Section II is extended along
ﬁve key dimensions:
1) We introduce an approach inspired by PENS [23] that
enables the simultaneous merging of multiple models,
facilitating more effective knowledge integration;
2) We design the Active-Peer Random Selection mecha-
nism, which implements a multi-peer selection strategy
seeking to enhance convergence speed;
3) We propose the Age-weighted Overwrite merge strategy,
where the probability of overwriting the current model
is proportional to the age ratio between the current and
received models;
4) We investigate the role of two stopping criteria–
FixedUpdates and EarlyStopping–in mitigating
overﬁtting and ensuring stable model convergence;
5) Finally, we analyze the impact of a model compres-
sion mechanism based on random sampling of network
weights, balancing communication efﬁciency and learn-
ing performance.
1) Conﬁgurable Number of Merged Models: We extend
the vanilla GL protocol to support the simultaneous merg-
ing of multiple models, drawing inspiration from the PENS
(Performance-based Neighbor Selection) algorithm [23].
PENS improves convergence in GL by prioritizing model
exchanges between peers with similar data distributions,
thereby mitigating challenges posed by non-iid data.
Following PENS, the OnReceiveModel procedure is
modiﬁed (see Algorithm 2). Instead of immediately merg-
ing incoming models, each received model is ﬁrst assessed
on local data and stored in a cache, potentially replacing
a previous version from the same peer. When the cache
accumulates T
3 models, the N top-performing (lowest loss)
models are selected, merged, and the resulting model is trained
locally. Finally, the cache is cleared to prevent stale updates
and counteract vanishing variance.
2) Active-Peer Random Selection: While similarity-based
selection (like the one implemented in PENS [23]) performs
well in stable environments, it struggles in dynamic settings
3The merging threshold T is a controllable parameter, constrained by the
node’s minimum degree.
3020 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025
Algorithm 2 Modiﬁed OnReceiveModel for Multi-Model
Merging
1: procedure ONRECEIVE MODEL (cr, wr )
2: lr ← GET LOSS (Dl, wr ) ⊿ Evaluate model on local data
3: cache.store((cr, wr, lr))
4: if cache.size() > T then:
5: models ← cache.get_best_n(N)
6: w ← MERGE (models)
7: w ← TRAIN (w, Dl )
8: c ← UPDATE CONTEXT (c, w, Dl )
9: cache.clear()
10: end if
11: end procedure
where network topology and workloads shift over time. To
address this limitation, we propose a peer selection mechanism
that remains resilient under such changes.
Rather than relying on feature similarity, we leverage
the DFaaS P2P network’s peer sampling service to enable
decentralized and scalable neighbor discovery. It prioritizes
peers based on latency, selecting topologically-closer nodes
to balance similarity with reduced communication overhead.
This locality-aware selection provides a crucial advantage: it
inherently adapts to evolving network conditions, seamlessly
integrating new nodes without requiring explicit similarity
estimation. Furthermore, unlike traditional GL, which predom-
inantly relies on unicast propagation, we employ multicast to
improve communication efﬁciency. To prevent excessive mes-
sage ﬂooding, we introduce a stochastic selection mechanism
that restricts interaction to a controllable fraction of active
peers. This ensures a diverse model exchange while keeping
message overhead manageable.
3) Age-Weighted Overwrite: In this paper, we propose
a novel model merging strategy, termed the Age-Weighted
Overwrite strategy, which synthesizes the Overwrite approach
(discussed in Section II-B) with the Age-Weighted Average
method, as introduced in [15].
The Age-Weighted Average [15] strategy modulates the
merging process by incorporating a weighting factor that
accounts for the age of each model. Formally, the age of
model i, denoted as t
i , is deﬁned as the cumulative number
of data records on which the model has been trained, where
each record is counted anew upon every training pass. This
formulation ensures that models trained on larger or more
frequently used datasets are assigned higher ages, reﬂecting
their accumulated learning history. The primary objective of
this approach is to mitigate the adverse effects of integrating
outdated models–i.e., models trained on substantially fewer
data points than the current one. The model age information
can be communicated through the context c, facilitating
efﬁcient coordination among distributed agents.
The proposed Age-Weighted Overwrite strategy introduces
a probabilistic overwrite mechanism, wherein the received
model may entirely replace the current model with probability
p, which is dynamically computed based on the relative ages
(deﬁned as in [15]) of the models. Speciﬁcally:
p =
⎧
⎨
⎩
1−
(
t
tr
)2
, if tr > t,
(tr
t
)2, if tr ≤t.
with t and tr representing the ages of the local and received
models, respectively.
4) Stopping Criteria: In its classical form, GL assumes that
the protocol is either continuously running or running for a
ﬁxed amount of time. While the literature offers numerous
sophisticated techniques for terminating training to prevent
overﬁtting (e.g., early stopping, as discussed in [44]), these
methods are often challenging to adapt to the GL paradigm.
This is because each node operates with a distinct model,
making it difﬁcult to deﬁne a general stopping criterion that
can effectively control the entire procedure.
In this work, we propose and examine the potential of
employing two stopping criteria for GL in our scenario:
1) FixedUpdates: each node is constrained to perform a
ﬁxed number of updates. A new update is performed
each time a node receives a message from a neighbor.
In the event that a message is received subsequent to
the threshold being reached, it is discarded. This is the
simplest criterion, but when applied it does not take into
account the quality of the resulting model.
2) EarlyStopping: each node implements an early stopping
mechanism. Upon each update, the merged model is
trained for a ﬁxed number of epochs. Subsequently, the
validation loss is evaluated and compared to that of the
best trained model so far. If the validation loss does not
show an improvement of at least a quantity equal to
the parameter designated as min_delta, a counter is
increased; otherwise, it is reset to zero. Upon reaching a
value designated aspatience, the stopping criterion is
met. The primary distinction between this approach and
a classical early-stopping procedure [44] is the way how
the validation loss is evaluated. In traditional approaches,
the comparison is conducted between a global reference
model and a local one. In this approach, however,
the validation loss is evaluated after each update on a
model—result of a merge operation—that may originate
from a distinct neighbor with respect to previous merged
models.
In both criteria, GL must address the issue of nodes
terminating their training at a different point in time. This
presents a challenge, as other nodes may continue selecting
a node that is no longer active in training activities, resulting
in the inefﬁcient utilization of network resources and a slower
convergence speed. Nevertheless, this issue can be addressed
by establishing two fundamental rules:
1) Whenever a node receives a message including a model
after its stopping criterion has been satisﬁed, it discards
it and notiﬁes the sender that it is no longer active;
2) A node must keep the MainLoop running for as long
as it has some active neighbors, regardless of whether
it has stopped or not, to ensure that its model—which
is ﬁnal if it has met its stopping criterion—can be sent
to them. This ensures that those neighbors can continue
updating their models until they also meet the stopping
criterion.
More details on node states and transitions in our simulations
will be provided in Section IV-A.
5) Model Compression via Subsampling: The exchange of
model updates among peers in decentralized learning systems
TUNDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED EDGE WORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING 3021
introduces signiﬁcant network overhead, particularly as models
grow in size and complexity. This communication burden not
only affects scalability but also exacerbates vanishing variance.
To address these challenges, model compression has been
proposed as a means to reduce network overhead, mitigate van-
ishing variance, and enhance generalization [45], [46], [47].
A seminal work in this area explores strategies for improv-
ing communication efﬁciency in FL through compression
techniques such as quantization, sparsiﬁcation, low-rank
approximation, and subsampling [45]. However, in the
speciﬁc domain of GL, the use of model compression tech-
niques remains underexplored. A handful of studies have
proposed subsampling, where only a ﬁxed percentage of
randomly-selected model weights is shared with selected
peers [15], [43]. Building upon this body of work, our paper
investigates subsampling as a model compression technique
due to its proven computational efﬁciency.
IV . D
ISCRETE -EVENT SIMULATOR
We designed a discrete-event simulator capable of running
both the GL classical protocol and the proposed extensions.
The simulator is scenario-agnostic, meaning it is not restricted
to the speciﬁc context described in Section III-A.
Events are processed sequentially based on their times-
tamps, that is, when a new event occurs, it is added to a
time-ordered priority queue, whose elements are processed by
the simulator one at a time. The simulation ends when the
queue is empty. Optionally, a simulation can be conﬁgured so
that each node will periodically test its current model against a
set of benchmark models, which shall be the same for all nodes
(e.g., a model trained in a centralized fashion). By computing
the loss function for the predictions made at each step, it is
possible to analyze the training progress, both in terms of
loss reduction and convergence speed among the models in
different nodes.
The simulator allows conﬁguring the capacity of each link
by specifying the time required to transfer model weights–
expressed in simulated seconds. It is possible to deﬁne
both indirect and direct links to create a wide variety of
network topologies, with conﬁgurable download and upload
bandwidths. Finally, the simulator supports both link and
node failures in a customizable way. We have integrated
both the carbontracker [48] and the scalene [49] proﬁlers to
gather information on the power, energy, CPU and memory
consumption in several phases of the GL protocol.
In the following, we detail the most relevant aspects of the
simulator: the support of different node states and transitions
between them, and the simulation workﬂow including the
types of generated events.
A. Node States and Transitions
Nodes can be in four different states, namely, ACTIVE,
TRAINING, STOPPED, and FAILED. A node is ACTIVE
if it continues accepting incoming messages from neighbors
and updating its own model. A node is TRAINING when
an update is triggered. This occurs when an ACTIVE node
receives a message from a neighbor and later begins training
Fig. 2. Network with 7 nodes with different states. Green nodes (3 and
5) are ACTIVE, blue node (2) is TRAINING, gray nodes (1, 4, and 6) are
STOPPED, and the red node is FAILED. Node 6 is not sending its model
weights because its neighbors (nodes 1 and 4) are also stopped.
its merged model. Upon completion of the training, depending
on whether the stopping criterion is met, the node can return
to the ACTIVE state or transition to the STOPPED one.
All messages received while the node is in the TRAINING
state are discarded. A node is STOPPED when it meets
the stopping criterion for training. Periodically, every node
undergoes a binomial trial with probability p to determine if it
should transition to the FAILED state. In this state, the node
ceases processing and discards all incoming messages. After
a conﬁgurable delay, it reverts to the ACTIVE state.
Fig. 2 shows an example network with 7 nodes. Green
nodes are ACTIVE (i.e., nodes 3 and 5), node 2 in blue is
TRAINING, three nodes are STOPPED (i.e., gray nodes 1, 4,
and 6), and 1 node is FAILED. AmongSTOPPED nodes, only
node 6 (dark gray) is not sending its model weights, because
both its neighbors are also stopped (i.e., nodes 1 and 4).
B. Workﬂow and Event Types
The simulator supports ﬁve main event types,
i.e., ReceiveModel, SendModel, SaveModel,
FailedNodeEvent, and RecoveryNodeEvent that will
be introduced in the following by describing the simulation
workﬂow.
According to the protocol speciﬁcation, each node must
periodically send a copy of its model weights to the target
neighbors. To do so, it should ﬁrst check if it has any
ACTIVE neighbor. If not, the event processing terminates
and the node stops sending model weights. Otherwise, the
node selects some targets to which it will send a copy of
its serialized (and possibly compressed) model weights. Both
target selection and model compression strategies depend on
the current simulator conﬁguration. After that, the simulator
triggers the ReceiveModel events for the selected target
neighbors and the next SendModel event for the current
node, which occurs right after the transmission of all models
to neighbors is completed.
Please note that during the initialization phase of a sim-
ulation, an instance of the SendModel event is generated
for each of the nodes and enqueued in the ﬁrst 60 seconds
of simulated time in a random fashion. This ensures that the
nodes start building their model asynchronously, eliminating
the bias of a sequential start.
As said, a node can receive messages from its neighbors
only if it is in ACTIVE state; otherwise, any received message
is discarded. Upon receiving a message, the model weights
are stored locally until T models are received from distinct
3022 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025
nodes. Once this threshold is reached, the N best performing
ones, in addition to the local one, are merged into a single
model using the chosen merge strategy, and this undergoes
training for a ﬁxed number of epochs. After the training
process is completed, the SaveModel event is triggered.
Separating these two events allows the simulator to evaluate
the computational time required to conduct the training.
Upon completion of a round of model updates, a node
must evaluate the new model performance by computing the
validation loss. If this is lower than the one of the previous
model, indicating improved performance, the node should
store the updated model parameters. Additionally, the node
must assess its stopping criterion to determine its next state.
Finally, at regular intervals, the simulator probabilistically
determines whether a node should transition to the failing
state. If so, it generates both a FailedNodeEvent, marking
the node’s transition to a state where it halts processing and
discards incoming messages, and a RecoveryNodeEvent
with a future timestamp, scheduling the node’s return to the
ACTIVE state. An open-source prototype of the simulator is
publicly accessible [26].
V. E
XPERIMENTAL SETUP
This section provides details on the datasets preparation
(Section V-A), the ML model used for all the experiments
(Section V-B), and ﬁnally, the training methodology and
evaluation metrics we considered (Section V-C).
A. Datasets Preparation
We considered two different types of workload traces as
datasets for our experiments: synthetic traces, which we con-
sidered to perform an initial training campaign and an ablation
study validating the different components of our GL protocol,
and real traces extracted from the workload of Microsoft’s
Azure Functions [50]. In both cases, since no information is
provided in the Azure dataset about which nodes serve the
incoming requests, the mapping between workload traces over
time and the nodes in the P2P network has been generated
based on real data related to the positions of telecommuni-
cation towers and the movement of people within the city of
Porto (Portugal). The underlying assumption behind exploiting
mobility traces in the data generation process is that people’s
movement within a city is a good proxy for network trafﬁc
generated by users at the far edge.
In the following, we focus on the adopted procedures for
network and trafﬁc generation. In particular, the ﬁrst and
last steps are common to both the synthetic and real-traces
dataset, while the trafﬁc generation process has been carried
out differently in the two cases.
1) Network Generation: The ﬁrst step involves generating
a network of interconnected nodes distributed over a geograph-
ical area. Speciﬁcally, several networks have been generated by
considering the central area of Porto city (latitude in [41.1369,
41.1690], longitude in [-8.6338, -8.5862]) and sampling real
antenna positions from the OpenCellID
4 public dataset. An
example is shown in Fig. 3.
4https://opencellid.org
Fig. 3. Example of a generated 3-edge connected network with 10 nodes.
After selecting the desired number n of nodes, we generated
networks with the desired degree of edge connectivity k;5 note
that, considering telecommunication networks, it is safe to
assume a connectivity greater than 1 to ensure a minimum
level of redundancy and resilience against link failures.
Our algorithm weights the links according to Harvesine
distance between nodes, which is a measure of the distance
between two points on the surface of a sphere. This metric
is often used to compute geographical distances, especially
in navigation, as it provides more accurate measures than the
classical Euclidean distance.
2) Trafﬁc Generation: This step has been detailed differ-
ently according to whether synthetic or real function traces
are considered. First of all, in both cases we have divided the
considered region of the Porto city into a 20 × 20 grid, which
simpliﬁes the dataset generation process and enables a rapid
creation of alternative datasets. Considering a speciﬁc network
generated as in the previous stage, each grid is assigned
to a different tower based on its distance from the tower
locations. To guarantee a realistic trafﬁc proﬁle towards the
towers, we have considered thePorto taxi
6 dataset, which
encompasses GPS trajectories of taxis operating in the city of
Porto, sampled every 15 seconds, over the course of a year
spanning from 2013 to 2014.
To generate the synthetic workload traces, for each cell of
the grid we constructed a time series representing the number
of taxis present at any given moment, and we assumed that a
function request is generated whenever the GPS coordinates of
a taxi are sampled and directed towards the tower associated to
the grid the taxi is into. Considering the Azure function traces,
instead, we proceeded by associating each application owner
with one of the taxis in the Porto dataset. All requests coming
from a speciﬁc owner (i.e., taxi) are then directed towards the
tower associated with the grid where the taxi is at a given
moment in time. It is relevant noting that the Azure traces
include the number of per-minute function invocations over 14
consecutive days; in our work, we have considered aggregated
5Ag r a p hi sk-edge-connected if it remains connected whenever less than
k edges are removed; this occurs if each node has at least k neighbors.
6https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/crailtap/taxi-trajectory
TUNDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED EDGE WORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING 3023
invocations over 15-minute time intervals to limit the noise in
the workload signal.
3) Pre-Processing: For each possible conﬁguration (n, k),
where n represents the number of nodes and k is the network
edge connectivity, 10 network variants and their corresponding
node datasets are generated. For simplicity, the unique pair
given by a conﬁguration and one of its instances will be
referred to as experimental setting. The datasets produced for
each experimental setting undergo a series of pre-processing
steps to prepare them for training. In particular, a total of
ν−τtime sequences is generated by each node to be used
for training, where νis the number of generated observations
and τ=4 is the number of past timesteps to be used for
predictions. Obtained sequences are reshaped into a training
record (X
i, Yi ), where Xi is the feature array for each time
step and Yi is a scalar value representing the true number
of requests to be predicted for each timestep. The 20% of
prepared sequences form the test set, while the 10% of those
in the training set are kept for validation.
The resulting datasets (one per node) contain a univariate
time series representing the number of requests, towards a
speciﬁc serverless function, that are generated by clients
connected to the base station at each speciﬁc time step. Not
considering the presence of multiple serverless functions is not
a limitation; indeed, as shown in [51], the best approach for
FaaS workload forecasting is training a single global univariate
model on samples from different time series (i.e., related
to different functions) and use it to predict the incoming
trafﬁc for all functions, meaning that our approach can be
readily extended to consider multiple functions. Global uni-
variate models should be preferred over alternatives because:
(i) serverless functions often exhibit similar patterns, so a
model performing well on one time series is likely to do so
also on others; and (ii) the multiplicity of functions is too high
to train either a separate univariate model for each function or
a multivariate model with such a large number of outputs.
B. Machine Learning Model
The ML model trained by each node is an LSTM (Long
Short-Term Memory) neural network, widely recognized as
the de facto standard for handling time series data due to
its robustness against the vanishing gradients problem [52].
Although transformers often yield better results, their superior
performance for time-series forecasting is still in question[53];
the large number of trainable parameters makes it impractical
to continuously serialize and transmit them over the network.
The architecture and hyperparameters tuning were con-
ducted manually. The ﬁnal model comprises 2 stacked LSTM
layers with 50 units each (using the tanh activation function),
followed by a fully connected (FC) layer with 32 units (using
the ReLU activation function), and a single-unit output layer.
A dropout rate of 20% is applied before each FC layer as
a regularization technique. The Adam optimizer [54] was
chosen, with an initial learning rate of 0.001.
We used the Mean Squared Error (MSE) as a loss function,
as is commonly done for regression problems. MSE is partic-
ularly suitable for this application as it penalizes larger errors
more heavily, making it effective in cases where the magnitude
of the error is critical, not just its proportion to the true
value.
C. Training Methodology and Evaluation Metrics
For each tested experimental setting, including a speciﬁc set
of GL protocol parameters, we run 10 different simulations
so that the same conﬁguration and network features get tested
on different network variants. Each simulation produces n
models ˜M
i (one per node), whose performance is compared
with those of two benchmark approaches: single-node models
Mi , trained exclusively on local data, and a centralized model
MC , trained on combined data obtained by aggregating and
shufﬂing the training records from all nodes. For a subset of
our experiments (i.e., Sections VI-A, VI-B1, and VI-B3)w e
also compared our approach with Federated Learning (FL)
using FedAvg [17] as aggregation strategy.
We considered the MSE our main evaluation metric to
compare model performance, which is also the loss function
used for training as mentioned in Section V-B. Furthermore,
we computed its mean (MMSE) and standard deviation (STD)
across all trained models and simulations, along with the
Relative Standard Deviation (RSD), deﬁned as STD
MMSE . Since
it is scale-invariant, RSD provides a meaningful measure of
how similar the errors obtained by different models are.
These metrics were computed in the classical way by
comparing the predictions made by a node model with the
true values contained in its local test set. However, this was
not sufﬁcient to evaluate the generalization capabilities of the
trained models, whose optimization is the main goal of a
decentralized learning approach (see Section I). Therefore, we
deﬁned generalization metrics by computing MSE, MMSE,
STD and RSD, for each model, using as test set the union of
all the node neighbors test sets. In the latter case, it is thus
possible to evaluate the capability of the model to recognize
patterns experienced by other nodes.
VI. E
MPIRICAL EVA L UAT I O N
This section presents and analyzes the results of all
experiments performed to validate the GL protocol in our
context. In particular, a preliminary comparison among the
centralized approach, the single-node (i.e., local-only) training,
and GL featuring different merge strategies is conducted in
Section VI-A. Section VI-B presents the results of an ablation
study aimed at exploring the impact of the different GL
protocol conﬁguration parameters, and a scalability analysis is
discussed in Section VI-C. A summary of our observations on
how different techniques that reduce the network usage affect
the GL generalization capabilities and model training times
is reported in Table I. Section VI-D analyses the resilience
of GL with respect to the failure of different percentages
of nodes during training. A validation of our GL protocol
considering real function invocation traces coming from the
Microsoft Azure dataset [50] is reported and discussed in
Section VI-E. Finally, GL is assessed in terms of energy and
resource utilization in Section VI-F.
3024 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025
TABLE I
IMPACT OF DIFFERENT STRATEGIES THAT REDUCE NETWORK USAGE ON
GL G ENERALIZATION CAPABILITIES AND TRAINING TIME
TABLE II
BASELINE NETWORK AND GL P ROTOCOL CONFIGURATION
Fig. 4. Comparison among GL with different merge strategies, single-node
and centralized training, and Federated Learning (red triangles denote the
average MMSE across all experiments).
A. Comparison With Benchmark Approaches
Our initial experiments evaluate whether GL can serve as
a viable alternative to single-node, centralized, and Federated
Learning approaches. To do so, we conducted experiments
using conﬁguration parameters consistent with those reported
in the literature [15] (see Table II), comparing the impact of
different merge strategies. In these experiments, we did not
consider the protocol extensions proposed in Section III-C
apart from using the Age-Weighted Overwrite merge strategy.
We performed ten simulations across all the generated
variants of a 10 nodes 3-edge connected network. The MSE
and average MMSE values, considering both the classical and
generalized version (see Section V-C), are reported in Fig. 4.
We observe that the values of metrics computed in the
classical way are roughly equivalent for all approaches except
for FL. In contrast, the generalization performance of GL
models is better than those of single-node models, even though
worse than the ones of the centralized model, and FL, which,
however, shows a reduced variance. Notably, FL achieved
generalization performance on par with GL while exhibiting
reduced variance. This outcome is anticipated, as FL trains
a uniﬁed model for all nodes by averaging their parameters,
TABLE III
THE MEAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION OF MSE FOR DIFFERENT
NUMBERS OF UPDATES AND TRAINING EPOCHS
thereby slightly penalizing individual node performance in
favor of enhanced overall generalization. Furthermore, the
Age-Weighted Overwrite strategy, although marginally inferior
to the Age-Weighted Average strategy in terms of MMSE,
still slightly improves the base Overwrite strategy in terms
of classical metrics. Finally, we can observe from the exten-
sion of box-plot bars that, with the only exception of the
generalization performance of the centralized model, all the
other strategies achieve comparable values of STD and RSD.
Collectively, these results underscore the robustness of the GL
protocol with respect to the adopted merge strategy across both
classical and generalization metrics.
B. Impact and Robustness of GL Protocol Parameters
We experimented with various conﬁgurations of the GL
protocol to evaluate how they balance model generalization
capabilities, network transmission costs (i.e., network usage),
and training time. In all subsequent sections, except for
Section VI-B3, we present results using the Age-Weighted
Average merge strategy. This strategy is slightly more effective
in terms of generalization metrics.
1) Number of Epochs Per Update and Number of Updates:
We evaluated the impact on performance and convergence
speed of varying the number of updates per node and
training epochs per update, while keeping all other param-
eters unchanged. The results presented in Table III indicate
that increasing the number of epochs per update can yield
performance comparable to or even superior to that of a higher
number of updates with fewer epochs, based on classical met-
rics. Regarding generalization power, as expected, reducing the
number of updates negatively impacts performance. However,
the GL models still outperform those trained on a single
node, and different conﬁgurations of FL for classical metrics,
suggesting that a balance can be achieved between desired
accuracy and communication frequency among nodes.
This behavior happens because, when increasing the number
of epochs per update, models have more time to ﬁt a node
dataset after they are transferred. This increases the model
divergence (see Fig. 5), but at the same time implies a
faster and more robust training progress with respect to the
TUNDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED EDGE WORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING 3025
Fig. 5. MSE during training for one node during a sample experiment with
20 updates × 5 training epochs each. A spike occurs whenever a new model
arrives (the most it differs from the local model, the highest).
Fig. 6. Comparison between GL with different compression rates and
benchmark methods (red triangles: average MMSE across all experiments).
predictions performed on the local node datasets, albeit at the
expense of generalization.
2) Weights Compression Through Subsampling: This
approach applies only to average-based merge strategies,
intending to reduce the message size and, consequently,
network usage (which decreases proportionally to the sampling
rate if the number of updates per node remains constant).
We considered sampling rates of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6, 0.8, and
1 (i.e., no sampling), and set the other parameters as in
Table II. Experiments results (see Fig. 6) highlight how higher
sampling rates improve the performance in terms of classical
metrics, since they limit the impact that neighbors have
on the model development in each node. As before, while
generalization capabilities are negatively affected by model
sampling, the MMSE of GL models remains signiﬁcantly
lower than the one achieved by the single-node model, which
promotes the effectiveness of the paradigm.
3) Peer Sampling: One simple method to lower the number
of sent messages, thereby reducing network costs, is to
decrease the target sampling probability π, i.e., the likelihood
that a node will choose to communicate with its target
neighbors. Table IV, experiments with πvalues ranging from
0.25 to 1.0 reveal that variations in πexert only a marginal
TABLE IV
MSE M EAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION WITH DIFFERENT TARGET
SAMPLING PROBABILITIES π
TABLE V
MSE M EAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION WITH DIFFERENT NUMBERS OF
MERGED MODELS
inﬂuence on the performance of GL, while FL displays higher
sensitivity, affecting both classical and generalization metrics.
4) Number of Merged Models: To evaluate the impact of
the PENS-inspired variant described in Section III-C1,w e
run two experiments considering N = 3 merged models, one
with no compression and one with 20% weights sampling.
In both cases, we observed an improvement in terms of
generalization capabilities, while the classical metrics remain
roughly unchanged (see Table V).
However, it is relevant to note that using such a technique
increases the pressure on the network: since each node has
to wait until it receives a message from N > 1 (here, 3)
different neighbors before triggering an update, the overall
number of the exchanged messages will be at least N times
higher than in the standard case ( N = 1). In any case, note
that an N× estimate may be too optimistic: in general, nodes
do not receive exactly one message per update from each of
its neighbors; instead, multiple messages are exchanged before
collecting the N required sets of model weights.
5) Stopping Criteria: We run a set of experiments to
investigate the impact of the two stopping criteria introduced
in Section III-C4: FixedUpdates and EarlyStopping (ES). With
respect to the latter we want to investigate whether, from a
node perspective, its own validation loss history may be a
valid indicator of the overall training progress. In particular, we
designed a conservative EarlyStopping strategy that requires
5 updates without an improvement of at least 0.1 in validation
loss, and an aggressive EarlyStopping one, which requires 5
epochs without an improvement of at least 1. We compare it
with a FixedUpdate strategy where training is performed with
100 ﬁxed updates per node.
As shown in Table VI, even though the classical metrics
are roughly comparable, models trained with EarlyStopping
show remarkably worse generalization performance than those
trained for more epochs. Based on these results, it is reasonable
to assume that validation loss is not a sufﬁcient metric to deﬁne
3026 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025
TABLE VI
MSE M EAN AND STD DEVIATION WITH DIFFERENT STOPPING CRITERIA
Fig. 7. Average number of messages per node with respect to the number of
nodes in the network. Each blue data point represents the
m value within a
single simulation; red crosses represent the average over all the simulations.
an intelligent stopping criterion as it does not take into account
the generalization performance of models.
At the same time, we can observe that the generalization
capabilities of GL models are still superior to those of a single-
node-only model. Since EarlyStopping, limiting the number
of updates per node helps reduce the network usage and the
training time, a good trade-off can be found between the
models’ accuracy and the overall costs of their development.
C. Scalability and Network Costs
Scalability is one of the most relevant properties for dis-
tributed approaches. We analyzed how the GL protocol scales
to bigger P2P networks by considering as metric the average
number of messages exchanged per node throughout the sim-
ulation, denoted by
m. In particular, Sections VI-C1–VI-C4
evaluate whether and how this is inﬂuenced by the protocol
conﬁguration parameters. Section VI-C5 discusses whether GL
can limit, with respect to the centralized approach, the network
load each node is subject to. All experiments except those in
Section VI-C4 were run considering 25 updates per node, and
assuming that 4 epochs are trained per update.
1) Impact of the Number of Nodes in the Network: The
ﬁrst set of experiments explored the relationship between
m
and the number of nodes n, varied between 6 and 22, and two
larger networks with 50 and 100 nodes. All experiments were
conducted on 3-edge connected P2P networks. As expected,
m is roughly constant with respect to n (see Fig. 7). However,
it is relevant to note that the observed value of m is always
signiﬁcantly higher than the theoretical minimum (which is 25,
as the number of updates per node). This discrepancy arises
because nodes typically exchange multiple messages before
the communication process is effectively concluded.
Another key factor affecting
m is the number of incom-
ing messages a node discards, either because it is in the
Fig. 8. Average number of messages per node for different network graphs.
TRAINING state or because it has already begun the transition
to the STOPPED state (see Section IV-A). In particular,
the number of messages discarded during the transition to
STOPPED is relatively small, and its impact diminishes, as
the number of per-node updates increases. In contrast, the
number of messages discarded during the
TRAINING state is
inﬂuenced by the average number of neighbors of each node
(i.e., by the k-edge connectivity of the network), and by the
ratio between the training and the model transfer times, as
clariﬁed in the next sections.
2) Impact of the Number of P2P Network Links: Since, as
mentioned, the number of discarded messages is inﬂuenced
by the average degree of a network node, it is interesting
to see how network costs are impacted by an increase in
the number of network links. For this reason, three sets of
experiments were performed. We initially considered 10-nodes
and 20-nodes networks, respectively, and tuned thek parameter
related to the k-edge connectivity by considering: (i) all values
between 1 and 9 for the 10-nodes network; (ii) all odd values
between 3 and 19 for the 20-nodes network. Then, we kept
k = 3 ﬁxed and varied n between 5 and 20 as in the previous
section.
Note that, as mentioned in Section V-A1, k-edge connec-
tivity is guaranteed if each node has at least k neighbors.
However, the actual number of edges may be slightly different
depending on the generated topology. Therefore, to better
characterize the network graphs, we will report in the next
ﬁgures their edge/nodes ratio instead of the prescribed k value.
Figure 8 reveals a linear relationship between the ratio
of edges to nodes (i.e., the average number of links per
node) and
m across all experimental settings. Moreover, the
uniformity of the linear regression coefﬁcients, combined with
the analysis in the previous section, leads us to conclude that
m is independent of the number of nodes in the network and
depends solely on the node degree.
3) Impact of the Transfer Time and Target Sampling
Probability: We validated the observation that high values of
m are related to a large number of message rejections by
increasing by 10 times the model transfer time (i.e., High
transfer time), under the assumption that, if this is signiﬁcantly
longer than the training time, the chance of receiving a
message while in the TRAINING state is lower. Furthermore,
since we observe fewer rejections when decreasing the target
TUNDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED EDGE WORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING 3027
Fig. 9. Average number of messages per node for different transfer times
and neighbor sampling probabilities.
Fig. 10. Average number of messages per node varying the number of
updates.
sampling probability π, we also run a set of simulations
with π =0 .25 instead of 1 (i.e., Low neighbor sampling
probability). We considered 20-nodes networks and varied k
as done previously.
Results are shown in Figure 9: we observe that the values
of m decrease more signiﬁcantly for more dense networks. In
this setting, reducing the sample probability πproves to be
very effective in decreasing the network load.
4) Impact of the Number of Model Updates: It is reason-
able to assume that m grows proportionally to the number of
per-node updates within a simulation. To validate this, we run
a set of experiments with a variable number of updates on a
20-node 3-edge connected network (see Fig. 10). The results
of Fig. 10 conﬁrm our assumption.
5) Comparison With the Centralized Approach: We com-
pared the trafﬁc generated by the GL protocol and the
centralized approach considering a star network architecture,
where the master node (i.e., centralized server) is directly
linked with all the participants. In terms of network costs,
this can be considered the best-case scenario for centralized
training, as all the data transmissions between master and
clients have only to traverse the single link connecting them.
In a centralized scenario, the incoming network cost for
a master node connected to n clients is nD, where D is the
dataset dimension, whereas the outgoing network trafﬁc is nM,
where M is the model size. Therefore, the overall network cost
Fig. 11. Comparison between the network load with GL and the centralized
approach, expressed as a function of the model size M.
can be deﬁned as:
CC = C in
C + C out
C = nD + nM = n(αM + M )
= n(1 +α)M,
where αis a scaling factor between model and dataset size
(in our experiments, αis ∼ 4.7).
On the other hand, the average network load for a node
participating in GL is given by:
C GL = C in
GL + C out
GL
= r mM + r mM =2 r mM,
where r ∈ (0, 1] denotes the compression rate if weights
sampling is applied.
As discussed in Section VI-C1, m and, consequently, C GL,
remain invariant with respect to the number of nodes n.
This invariance implies that, irrespective of the GL protocol
parameters and associated network costs, there always exists
a sufﬁciently large n for which
C GL < CC . An example
is reported in Fig. 11, where we report the network load
computed for: (i) a 3-edge connected network (with r = 1),
(ii) a 6-edge connected network (with r = 1), and (iii) a
centralized master node varying the value of α.
For both values of k and all α, we observe that CC
becomes higher than C GL as the number of nodes reaches
a given threshold. We can conclude that the GL protocol
offers advantages over the centralized model in terms of
network load, particularly when dealing with large graphs.
While the GL protocol may generate more trafﬁc in smaller
networks, it distributes communications more evenly across
the network. This reduces the likelihood of bottlenecks, which
are more common when all data must be sent from clients to
a centralized server.
D. Node Failure Resiliency
We assessed the resiliency of our approach to node failures
by varying the failure probability. In each simulation, at ﬁxed
intervals of i = 60, the simulator probabilistically determines
whether to trigger a node failure based on the conﬁgured
probability p ∈{0.0025, 0.005, 0.01}. When a failure occurs,
the recovery time is sampled from a normal distribution with
mean μ= 125 and standard deviation σ=5 .
The parameters i, μ, and σwere chosen by considering
the network size (10 nodes), the overall simulated training
3028 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025
TABLE VII
MEAN MSE, STD, AND RSD FOR THE CLASSICAL METRIC FOR ALL THE
NODES IN THE NETWORK ,N ON -FAILED NODES , AND FAILED NODES
UNDER DIFFERENT NODE FAILURE PROBABILITIES
TABLE VIII
MEAN MSE, STD, AND RSD FOR THE GENERALIZATION METRIC FOR
ALL THE NODES IN THE NETWORK ,N ON -FAILED NODES , AND FAILED
NODES UNDER DIFFERENT NODE FAILURE PROBABILITIES
duration at each round (5 time units), and the model weights
transmission time (i.e., tw ∈[25, 35]). For instance, with a
failure probability of p =0 .01, the simulation produces an
average of 4 node failures, with each failure causing a node
to miss approximately 3–4 training rounds before recovering.
In our experiments, runs with node failures occurred as
follows: for p=0 .0025, 6 out of 10 runs experienced failures
(10 failures in total, averaging 1.0 failure per run); for p =
0.005, 9 out of 10 runs were affected (18 failures in total,
averaging 1.8 failures per run); and for p =0 .01, all 10 runs
exhibited failures (53 failures in total, averaging 5.3 failures
per run).
Tables VII and VIII summarize the performance results
using the classical and generalization metrics, respectively.
For each metric, we report aggregated values of the MMSE,
STD, and RSD computed across all nodes, non-failed nodes,
and failed nodes.
The results are consistent with our initial comparisons with
benchmark approaches (see Fig. 4), as there is no signiﬁcant
performance difference between failed and non-failed nodes–
demonstrating the notable resilience of our approach. An
exception was observed for p =0.0025, where the failed
nodes exhibited an unexpected increase in MMSE (and a
high STD) for the generalization metric. Further investigation
revealed that, in one run, the sole failed node produced a
substandard model (with a generalization MSE of 14299),
which skewed the aggregated metrics. Additionally, one of
its three neighboring nodes also concluded the simulation
with poor performance (a generalization MSE of 9829), while
the remaining neighbors performed comparably to the non-
failed nodes. We hypothesize that this deviation is attributable
to the interplay between network topology and random peer
selection; however, further experiments are required to validate
this hypothesis.
E. Validation With Real Function Traces
Following the same approach described in Section V-C,
we trained GL models on the datasets built upon Microsoft
TABLE IX
MSE M EAN AND STANDARD DEVIATION FOR GL, S INGLE -NODE AND
CENTRALIZED MODELS TRAINED AND TESTED ON THE AZURE
FUNCTIONS DATASET
Azure functions traces [50] as outlined in Section V-A.W e
considered ten randomly-generated 10-node, 3-edge-connected
networks and adopted the conﬁguration parameters described
in Table II, and the Age-Weighted Average merge strategy.
The results achieved by GL, single-node, and centralized
models, both in terms of classical and generalized metrics, are
reported in Table IX. The values of classical and generalized
metrics conﬁrm the pattern observed with synthetic traces,
with the GL protocol improving the generalization capabilities
of the models with respect to the single-node case.
Additionally, Figure 12 reports the real and predicted work-
load values for a sample experiment, obtained by one node
participating in the GL protocol. The predictions align with
both the training and test traces, as well as with the common
test trace used to evaluate the generalized metrics. Although
peak values are not correctly identiﬁed by the model in most
cases, the predictions capture well the moving average of
the distributions, which is represented in the ﬁgure by the
green line, and closely follow the workload pattern. The same
behavior can be observed in Figure 13, which reports the real
and predicted traces for the common test set obtained with the
single-node model and the centralized model.
F . Energy and Resource Proﬁling
We leveraged carbontracker [48] to monitor the power (in
Watt) and energy (in Joule) required by speciﬁc node opera-
tions throughout the GL simulation. In particular, we focused
on the model training, collecting metrics for each epoch,
and on the SendModel and ReceiveModel events (see
Section IV-B), gathering the power and energy consumption
related to each event processing. We run simulations consid-
ering 30 updates per node, and running 10 training epochs per
update. We chose to increase the number of epochs per update
with respect to the experiments reported in Section VI-E
to ensure that the time spent by nodes in the training and
model update phases is large enough to guarantee stable
measurements. We trained the models considering the dataset
based on Azure functions traces, running on a MacBook Pro
M3 with 11 cores and 18Gb RAM.
The average, standard deviation and quantiles of the col-
lected metrics per each model ﬁt, send model and receive
model call are reported in Table X. As in the previous sections,
they were obtained by considering 10 randomly-generated
networks. Throughout the overall simulation, which corre-
sponds to 300 training epochs and around 30 communication
rounds, each node consumes (on average) 2906.29 W for
model training, 310.30 W to send the model to peers, and
TUNDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED EDGE WORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING 3029
Fig. 12. Real and predicted workload values for a sample node participating in the GL protocol, considering the training, validation and test trace, a nd the
common test trace used to evaluate the generalized metrics. The green line represents a moving average of the real values over 4-step windows.
Fig. 13. Real and predicted workload values for the single-node (above) and the centralized model (below), considering the common test trace used to
evaluate the generalized metrics. The green line represents a moving average of the real values over 4-step windows.
TABLE X
E
NERGY CONSUMPTION IN DIFFERENT PHASES OF THE GL P ROTOCOL
320.75 W in the receive model routine. These can be used
to estimate the overall CO2 emissions by considering the
average carbon intensity where simulations were conducted
(in our case, Monza, Lombardy, IT, had an average intensity
of 330.72gCO2/kWh).
Throughout the simulations, we have also gathered
information on the CPU and RAM consumption, leveraging
the scalene [49] proﬁler. In particular, we have observed that
nodes spend most of their time in conducting the model
training phase (almost 90% of the overall runtime). This
is characterized by an average CPU utilization of 79.48%
(with a standard deviation of 13.70) and consumes on average
27.82Mb of RAM (with a standard deviation of 0.85); the
peak RAM consumption is of 41.45 Mb on average (standard
deviation: 3.78), which guarantees that the training process is
tractable even for small-scale edge devices.
VII. R
ELATED WORK
This section recalls the main related work in the context of
time series forecasting and edge workload forecasting, with
main focus on decentralized learning.
A. Time-Series Analysis and Prediction
The ﬁeld of edge workload forecasting is based on the
principles of time-series analysis and prediction, a subject
that has been extensively researched and documented in the
academic literature for a considerable period of time [55].I n
general, classical approaches (e.g., ARIMA [56]) for time-
series prediction aim to forecast a single time series by
studying linear relationships between observations collected in
the past and future observations. Typically, this linear approach
yields suboptimal predictions [55]. In recent times, there has
been a notable increase in the use of neural network models,
largely due to their capacity to discern non-linear relationships.
For example, Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) models, such
as LSTM [52] and Gated Recurrent Unit (GRU) [57],a r e
widely used. However, these ML models often require greater
time and hardware resources for training purposes [55].I nt h i s
paper we adopted LSTM given the good performance obtained
in some preliminary experiments.
B. ML-Based Workload Forecasting at the Edge
Recently, research efforts have been made on the use
of ML techniques speciﬁcally for workload forecasting in
edge environments. For instance, Miao et al. [58] present an
approach based on Graph Neural Networks to capture the
interconnected topology of edge servers, assuming that servers
in close proximity often exhibit similar workload patterns.
Ma et al. [55] propose an edge-cloud collaboration as a
means of capturing inter-site correlations while simultaneously
advancing a distributed approach wherein the majority of the
3030 IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON NETWORK AND SERVICE MANAGEMENT, VOL. 22, NO. 4, AUGUST 2025
computation is conducted at the Edge. Some recent work has
also adopted the Federated Learning paradigm as a means
to collaboratively train a model for workload forecasting at
the Edge without sharing local data. For instance, Que and
Khan [59] focus on this aspect in the context of Metro Optical
Networks. However, these studies still either perform model
training in a single location or need a central coordination, as
in the case of Federated Learning. Our approach completely
eliminates the need for a central location and fully decentral-
izes model training at the Edge.
C. Decentralized Training Solutions
When dealing with the need for decentralized training,
some studies investigate the possibility of adapting FL to a
decentralized setting [16], [60], [61]. Wink and Nochta [61]
propose a P2P variant of FL that can enhance data con-
ﬁdentiality and privacy protection, particularly in systems
that cater to smaller groups of collaborating data owners.
In the proposed approach, peers do not exchange model
weights; rather, they collaboratively perform Secure Average
Computation to obtain the merged models. Kalra et al. [60]
propose ProxyFL, a proxy-based FL method for decentral-
ized collaboration that facilitates the training of robust and
high-performance models while maintaining data privacy and
communication efﬁciency. Zhou et al. [16] present PPAFL,
a P2P-based privacy-perceiving asynchronous FL framework
for the decentralized training of secure and resilient mobile
robotic systems. These works built on top of a seminal paper
by Hegedüs et al. [15], which proposes Gossip Learning as a
promising decentralized alternative to FL [43]. Starting from
this body of research, our work aims at adopting decentralized
learning [14], with particular focus on GL, in the context of
workload forecasting at the Edge, while incorporating tailored
adaptations to this use case.
D. Gossip Learning Adaptations
Our proposed extensions and adaptations to GL are related
to four main aspects: (i) how the received models are merged,
(ii) how the peers are selected for sending model updates, (iii)
how the model can be compressed to reduce communication
overhead and (iv) when the protocol should stop its execution.
In literature, some different merging strategies have been
proposed, being either parameter-based [15], [38], or gradient-
based [39]. In our paper we adopt the merging strategies
designed in [15], and we propose a novel strategy, i.e.,
Age-Weighted Overwrite, that incentivize more stable models.
In addition, inspired by [23], we enable the simultaneous
merging of multiple models. Different peer selection strategies
have also been proposed, based, e.g., on topology-aware
selection and node prioritization [35], [36], [37]. In this paper
we instead adopt an active-peer random selection strategy,
which better suits to dynamic network conditions as those
occurring in the considered scenario. Model compression has
been investigated in some papers [15], [43], [47]: building
upon them, we propose subsampling as a mean to achieve
model compression. Finally, no previous work on GL focuses
on the problem of protocol execution’s stopping to prevent
overﬁtting. In this paper we propose two strategies, i.e.,
FixedUpdates and
EarlyStopping, with the latter adapted
from [44].
E. Time Series Forecasting With Gossip Learning
The application of GL to the forecasting of time-series
data has been investigated by few works in literature.
Dinati et al. [62] focus on vehicle trajectory prediction. Their
scenario is similar to the one considered in this work, as
it accounts for dynamic network topologies. However, our
study introduces the extensions reported in Section VII-D
and extends the evaluation to aspects related to scalability
and network costs. Palmieri et al. [63] investigate the impact
of different network topologies on the capacity of nodes to
incorporate knowledge derived from data patterns observed
in other nodes into their local models. Their work provides
a valuable complement to our experiments on the impact of
network size, focusing on the impact of network topology
variation on GL.
VIII. C
ONCLUSION
This paper addressed the workload forecasting problem
in a fully-decentralized edge environment, leveraging the
Gossip Learning paradigm to mitigate challenges arising from
geographical distribution, workload pattern heterogeneity, and
the dynamic nature of nodes, which join and leave the network
due to unstable links and failures. Building on existing peer-
to-peer learning protocols, we enhanced the foundational
Gossip Learning algorithm by introducing a performance-
driven selection mechanism that prioritizes models received
from neighboring nodes based on their quality. Additionally,
we proposed a novel merging strategy and integrated two
distinct stopping criteria into the protocol to mitigate overﬁt-
ting. Extensive experimental validation, conducted using the
discrete-event simulator developed in this work, demonstrated
the effectiveness of Gossip Learning and its extensions in a
representative P2P edge environment. Our results show that
Gossip Learning not only achieves competitive performance
against benchmark methods (i.e., centralized, single-node
learning, and Federated Learning) but also exhibits robustness
and scalability across diverse protocol and network conditions.
R
EFERENCES
[1] X. Kong, Y . Wu, H. Wang, and F. Xia, “Edge computing for Internet
of Everything: A survey,” IEEE Internet Things J. , vol. 9, no. 23,
pp. 23472–23485, Dec. 2022.
[2] C. N. L. Tan, C. Klein, and E. Elmroth, “Multivariate LSTM-based
location-aware workload prediction for edge data centers,” in Proc.
IEEE/ACM CCGRID, 2019, pp. 341–350.
[3] C. Cicconetti, M. Conti, and A. Passarella, “A Decentralized framework
for serverless edge computing in the Internet of Things,” IEEE Trans.
Netw. Serv. Manag., vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 2166–2180, Jun. 2021.
[4] I. Wang, E. Liri, and K. K. Ramakrishnan, “Supporting IoT applications
with serverless edge clouds,” in Proc. IEEE CloudNet , 2020, pp. 1–4.
[5] M. S. Aslanpour et al., “Serverless edge computing: Vision and chal-
lenges,” in Proc. ACSW, 2021, pp. 1–10.
[6] E. Paraskevoulakou and D. Kyriazis, “Leveraging the serverless
paradigm for realizing machine learning pipelines across the edge-cloud
continuum,” in Proc. ICIN, 2021.
[7] J. Jiang et al., “Towards demystifying Serverless machine learning
training,” in Proc. SIGMOD, 2021, pp. 110–117.
[8] P. G. Sarroca and M. S. Artigas, “MLLess: Achieving cost efﬁciency
in serverless machine learning training,” J. Parallel Distrib. Comput. ,
vol. 183, Jan. 2024, Art. no. 104764.
TUNDO et al.: DECENTRALIZED EDGE WORKLOAD FORECASTING WITH GOSSIP LEARNING 3031
[9] P. Aditya et al., “Will serverless computing revolutionize NFV?” Proc.
IEEE, vol. 107, no. 4, pp. 667–678, Apr. 2019.
[10] M. Savi, A. Banﬁ, A. Tundo, and M. Ciavotta, “Serverless computing
for NFV: Is it worth it? A performance comparison analysis,” in Proc.
IEEE PerCom Workshops, 2022, pp. 680–685.
[11] A. Sabbioni, A. Garbugli, L. Foschini, A. Corradi, and P. Bellavista,
“Serverless computing for QoS-effective NFV in the cloud edge,” IEEE
Commun. Mag., vol. 62, no. 4, pp. 40–46, Apr. 2024.
[12] V . Karagiannis, A. Venito, R. Coelho, M. Borkowski, and G. Fohler,
“Edge computing with peer to peer interactions: Use cases and impact,”
in Proc. IoT-Fog, 2019, pp. 46–50.
[13] M. Masdari and A. Khoshnevis, “A survey and classiﬁcation of the
workload forecasting methods in cloud computing,” Clust. Comput. ,
vol. 23, no. 4, pp. 2399–2424, 2020.
[14] L. Yuan, Z. Wang, L. Sun, P. S. Yu, and C. G. Brinton, “Decentralized
federated learning: A survey and perspective,” IEEE Internet Things J. ,
vol. 11, no. 21, pp. 34617–34638, Nov. 2024.
[15] I. Hegedüs, G. Danner, and M. Jelasity, “Gossip learning as a decentral-
ized alternative to federated learning,” in Proc. DAIS, 2019, pp. 74–90.
[16] X. Zhou et al., “Decentralized P2P federated learning for privacy-
preserving and resilient mobile robotic systems,” IEEE Wireless
Commun., vol. 30, no. 2, pp. 82–89, Apr. 2023.
[17] B. McMahan, E. Moore, D. Ramage, S. Hampson, and B. A. y Arcas,
“Communication-efﬁcient learning of deep networks from decentralized
data,” in Proc. AISTATS, 2017, pp. 1273–1282.
[18] M. Ciavotta, D. Motterlini, M. Savi, and A. Tundo, “DFaaS:
Decentralized function-as-a-service for federated edge computing,” in
Proc. IEEE CloudNet , 2021, pp. 1–4.
[19] C. Cicconetti, M. Conti, A. Passarella, and D. Sabella, “Toward
distributed computing environments with serverless solutions in edge
systems,” IEEE Commun. Mag. , vol. 58, no. 3, pp. 40–46, Mar. 2020.
[20] C. Cicconetti, M. Conti, and A. Passarella, “Architecture and
performance evaluation of distributed computation ofﬂoading in edge
computing,” Simul. Model. Pract. Theory , vol. 101, May 2020,
Art. no. 102007.
[21] T. Pfandzelter and D. Bermbach, “tinyFaaS: A lightweight FaaS platform
for edge environments,” in Proc. ICFC, 2020, pp. 17–24.
[22] I. Baldini et al., Serverless Computing: Current Trends and Open
Problems. Singapore: Springer, 2017.
[23] N. Onoszko, G. Karlsson, O. Mogren, and E. L. Zec, “Decentralized
federated learning of deep neural networks on non-IID data,” 2021,
arXiv:2107.08517.
[24] R. Ormándi, I. Heged˝ us, and M. Jelasity, “Asynchronous peer-to-peer
data mining with stochastic gradient descent,” in Proc. Eur. Conf.
Parallel Process., 2011, pp. 528–540.
[25] M. Polato. “gossipy documentation.” 2024. Accessed: Jul. 27, 2024.
[Online]. Available: https://makgyver.github.io/gossipy/index.html
[26] A. Tundo, F. Filippini, F. Regonesi, M. Ciavotta, and M. Savi. “unimib-
datAI gl-forecasting-edge.” 2024. Accessed: May 13, 2025. [Online].
Available: https://github.com/unimib-datAI/gl-forecasting-edge
[27] A. Tundo, F. Filippini, F. Regonesi, M. Ciavotta, and M. Savi. “Zenodo
repository.” 2024. Accessed: May 13, 2025. [Online]. Available: https://
doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.15393791
[28] M. Savi and F. Olivadese, “Short-term energy consumption forecasting
at the edge: A federated learning approach,” IEEE Access ,v o l .9 ,
pp. 95949–95969, 2021.
[29] V . Perifanis, N. Pavlidis, R.-A. Koutsiamanis, and P. S. Efraimidis,
“Federated learning for 5G base station trafﬁc forecasting,” Comput.
Netw., vol. 235, Nov. 2023, Art. no. 109950.
[30] H. G. Abreha, M. Hayajneh, and M. A. Serhani, “Federated learning in
edge computing: A systematic survey,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 2, p. 450,
2022.
[31] R. Ormándi, I. Heged˝ us, and M. Jelasity, “Gossip learning with linear
models on fully distributed data,”Concurr. Comput., Pract. Exp., vol. 25,
no. 4, pp. 556–571, 2013.
[32] M. Jelasity, S. V oulgaris, R. Guerraoui, A.-M. Kermarrec, and M. van
Steen, “Gossip-based peer sampling,” ACM Trans. Comput. Syst.
,
vol. 25, no. 3, pp. 8–es, 2007.
[33] M. Assran, J. Romoff, N. Ballas, J. Pineau, and M. Rabbat, “Gossip-
based actor-learner architectures for deep reinforcement learning,” in
Proc. 33rd Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. , vol. 32, 2019, pp. 1–11.
[34] D. Kempe, J. Kleinberg, and A. Demers, “Spatial gossip and resource
location protocols,” J. ACM, vol. 51, no. 6, pp. 943–967, 2004.
[35] J. Zhang, L. Zhao, and N. Lin, “Similarity-based gossip learning for
generative adversarial networks,” in Proc. ICCSN, 2023, pp. 465–469.
[36] L. Giaretta and Š. Girdzijauskas, “Gossip learning: Off the beaten path,”
in Proc. IEEE Big Data , 2019, pp. 1117–1124.
[37] J. Daily, A. Vishnu, C. Siegel, T. Warfel, and V . Amatya, “Gossipgrad:
Scalable deep learning using gossip communication based asynchronous
gradient descent,” 2018, arXiv:1803.05880.
[38] T. Li, A. K. Sahu, M. Zaheer, M. Sanjabi, A. Talwalkar, and V . Smith,
“Federated optimization in heterogeneous networks,” in Proc. MLSys ,
2020, pp. 429–450.
[39] X. Lian, W. Zhang, C. Zhang, and J. Liu, “Asynchronous decen-
tralized parallel stochastic gradient descent,” in Proc. ICML , 2018,
pp. 3043–3052.
[40] Y . Wang, T. Yu, and K. Sakaguchi, “Context-based MEC platform for
augmented-reality services in 5G networks,” in Proc. IEEE VTC, 2021,
pp. 1–5.
[41] I. Lujic, V . D. Maio, K. Pollhammer, I. Bodrozic, J. Lasic, and I. Brandic,
“Increasing trafﬁc safety with real-time edge analytics and 5G,” in Proc.
EdgeSys, 2021, pp. 19–24.
[42] Y . Gou, S. Weng, M. A. Imran, and L. Zhang, “V oting consensus-based
decentralized federated learning,” IEEE Internet Things J., vol. 11, no. 9,
pp. 16267–16278, May 2024.
[43] I. Hegedüs, G. Danner, and M. Jelasity, “Decentralized learning works:
An empirical comparison of gossip learning and federated learning,” J.
Parallel Distrib. Comput., vol. 148, pp. 109–124, Feb. 2021.
[44] T. Zhang, T. Zhu, K. Gao, W. Zhou, and P. S. Yu, “Balancing learning
model privacy, fairness, and accuracy with early stopping criteria,”
IEEE Trans. Neural Netw. Learn. Syst. , vol. 34, no. 9, pp. 5557–5569,
Sep. 2023.
[45] H. B. McMahan et al., “Federated learning: Strategies for improving
communication efﬁciency,” in Proc. NeurIPS, 2016, pp. 1–10.
[46] A. Reisizadeh, A. Mokhtari, H. Hassani, A. Jadbabaie, and R. Pedarsani,
“Fedpaq: A communication-efﬁcient federated learning method with
periodic averaging and quantization,” in Proc. AISTATS , 2020,
pp. 2021–2031.
[47] H. Wang, S. Guo, Z. Qu, R. Li, and Z. Liu, “Error-compensated
sparsiﬁcation for communication-efﬁcient Decentralized training in edge
environment,” IEEE Trans. Parallel Distrib. Syst. , vol. 33, no. 1,
pp. 14–25, Jan. 2022.
[48] L. F. W. Anthony, B. Kanding, and R. Selvan, “Carbontracker: Tracking
and predicting the carbon footprint of training deep learning models,”
in Proc. ICML Workshop Challenges Deploying Monit. Mach. Learn.
Syst., 2020, pp. 1–11.
[49] E. D. Berger, S. Stern, and J. A. Pizzorno, “Triangulating
python performance issues with scalene,” in Proc. 17th USENIX
Symp. Oper. Syst. Design Implement. (OSDI) , Boston, MA, USA,
Jul. 2023, pp. 51–64. [Online]. Available: https://www.usenix.org/
conference/osdi23/presentation/berger
[50] M. Shahrad et al., “Serverless in the wild: Characterizing and optimizing
the serverless workload at a large cloud provider,” in Proc. USENIX
ATC, 2020, pp. 205–218.
[51] A. Joosen et al., “How does it function? Characterizing long-term trends
in production serverless workloads,” in Proc. SoCC, 2023, pp. 443–458.
[52] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber, “Long short-term memory,” Neural
Comput., vol. 9, no. 8, pp. 1735–1780, 1997.
[53] A. Zeng, M. Chen, L. Zhang, and Q. Xu, “Are transformers effective
for time series forecasting?” in Proc. AAAI, 2023, pp. 11121–11128.
[54] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
2014, arXiv:1412.6980.
[55] X. Ma, M. Xu, Q. Li, Y . Li, A. Zhou, and S. Wang, “Edge work-
load prediction based on deep learning,” in 5G Edge Computing:
Technologies, Applications and Future Visions . Singapore: Springer,
2024, pp. 45–61.
[56] G. E. Box, G. M. Jenkins, G. C. Reinsel, and G. M. Ljung, Time Series
Analysis: Forecasting and Control. Hoboken, NJ, USA: Wiley, 2015.
[57] R. Zhao, D. Wang, R. Yan, K. Mao, F. Shen, and J. Wang, “Machine
health monitoring using local feature-based gated recurrent unit
networks,” IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron. , vol. 65, no. 2, pp. 1539–1548,
Feb. s2018.
[58] W. Miao et al., “Workload prediction in edge computing based on graph
neural network,” in Proc. IEEE ISPA/BDCloud/SocialCom/SustainCom,
2021, pp. 1663–1666.
[59] C. Que and F. N. Khan, “A scalable federated learning-based approach
for accurate trafﬁc prediction in edge computing-enable metro optical
networks,” Comput. Ind. Eng. , vol. 203, May 2025, Art. no. 111004.
[60] S. Kalra, J. Wen, J. C. Cresswell, M. V olkovs, and H. R. Tizhoosh,
“Decentralized federated learning through proxy model sharing,” Nat.
Commun., vol. 14, no. 1, p. 2899, 2023.
[61] T. Wink and Z. Nochta, “An approach for peer-to-peer federated
learning,” in Proc. IEEE/IFIP DSN Workshops , 2021, pp. 150–157.
[62] M. A. Dinani, A. Holzer, H. Nguyen, M. A. Marsan, and G. Rizzo,
“Gossip learning of Personalized models for vehicle trajectory
prediction,” in Proc. IEEE WCNC Workshops , 2021, pp. 1–7.
[63] L. Palmieri, L. Valerio, C. Boldrini, and A. Passarella, “The effect
of network topologies on fully decentralized learning: A preliminary
investigation,” in Proc. NetAISys, 2023, pp. 1–6.